# Technical Working Group Meeting 22
***
 
**July 10, 2020**
 
## Participants
***
 
### Technical Working Group
* Shawn Acuña, Metropolitan Water District (MWD)
* Mike Beakes, United States Bureau of Reclamation (USBR)
* Bill Bennett, UC Davis, John Muir Institute of the Environment and Center for Watershed Sciences
* Larry Brown, United States Geological Survey (USGS)
* Erin Cole, United States Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS)
* Lauren Damon, Interagency Ecological Program (IEP)
* Ben Geske, Delta Science Program (DSP)
* Scott Hamilton, Coalition for a Sustainable Delta
* Sam Luoma, UC Davis, John Muir Institute of the Environment
* Randall Mager, California Department of Water Resources (DWR)
* Deanna Sereno, Contra Costa Water District (CCWD)
* Will Smith, United States Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS)
* Ted Sommer, California Department of Water Resources (DWR)
* Kate Spear, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)

### Project Team
* Mary Beth Day, Kearns & West
* Alyson Scurlock, Kearns & West 
* Graham Long, Compass Resource Management
* Dan Ohlson, Compass Resource Management
* Mike Urkov, FlowWest

### Guest Observer
* Rosemary Hartman, California Department of Water Resources (DWR)

## Action Items
***
* TWG members to continue their review of the candidate actions spreadsheet.
* Compass to continue to document modeling needs and existing modeling resources:
  + Compass to follow up with Deanna, Mike, Ted, and others regarding water modeling.
  + Compass to consider assembling a small work group for further detailed discussion.
* Compass to continue to develop the template for documenting Summer/Fall actions.
* Kearns & West to create a Doodle Poll for potential September meeting dates.

## Key Agreements or Outcomes
***
TWG members agreed that actions need to be further defined and documented. TWG members supported creating a template for documenting Summer/Fall actions.

## Introductions
***
The project team reviewed the agenda, meeting guidelines, and attendance roster for TWG members.

## Working Group Discussion – Management Actions
***
The project team reviewed the schedule for the next phase of work and the candidate management actions spreadsheet with the TWG.

* A TWG member suggested scheduling smaller work sessions around brainstormed ideas as a good next step for helping to further define actions.
  + A TWG member agreed that more work needs to be done to provide details for some of the ideas because some of the actions are unclear. 
  + The project team said that they have identified actions in the spreadsheet that they plan to have small groups discussion around to get some of the actions to a point where the TWG can conduct preliminary analysis or characterization. Some of these actions can be analyzed with the Summer/Fall actions or could be included during the second round of SDM. 
* A TWG member noted that some ideas in the spreadsheet have disappeared or have been combined into one general idea. The TWG member asked how specific ideas can be sorted for comparison. 
  + A TWG member suggested parceling ideas out by the season when the action would take place. 
* The project team reviewed a template for organizing actions. If TWG members generally agree with this direction, the project team can build an interface that allows everyone to explore different combinations of actions.
  + A TWG member liked the way the template was organized. 
* The project team is transitioning their focus to the overall documentation of Phase 2 to set them up to begin Phase 3 in the fall. The project team will recirculate the candidate management actions spreadsheet for TWG members to continue to review actions. 
  + A TWG member stated that the spreadsheet is limited in that there is not much space for TWG members to provide detail for each action. The TWG member asked if each action could be linked back to the metadata to explain what the idea is really about.
  + The project team agreed that full documentation is necessary, and they will begin the documentation for the more mature ideas that fall into Bins 3 and 4. 
  + A TWG member said that all of the actions, including mature ideas, need more discussion before they are documented. Mature ideas are not necessarily the best ideas.
  + The project team agreed but noted the documentation process can help the project team and the TWG start identifying what sensible next steps are for all of the actions. 

## Working Group Discussion – Modeling Requirements 
***
The project team discussed their vision of how the modeling framework would come together in the fall with the TWG. 

* A TWG member said the potential for modeling an action is the expensive part. It is important to have fully formed ideas with consensus on the modeling assumptions before actions are modeled.
  + A TWG member asked what was meant by a fully formed idea and how much consensus would be needed.
  + A TWG member suggested that there needs to be enough detail and description to start the model and that an action should be well described to understand when and how it would work. The TWG is still at the stage of fleshing out ideas. 
* The project team noted that the models and tools the TWG have discussed thus far are the Bioenergetics Model, Life Cycle Model, Performance Analysis, and the Maunder and Deriso Model. 
  + A TWG member said that they thought the Maunder and Deriso model was an earlier version of the Life Cycle Model. Both models were constructed the same way, but the Life Cycle Model was more advanced.
  + A TWG member agreed and said that the only difference between the Life Cycle Model and Maunder and Deriso Model is the density dependence. 
  + A TWG member suggested that the limitation of the Maunder and Deriso Model is the way the data that went into it was characterized. 
* The project team shared that there are examples of using multiple competing models and weighting them. There is a benefit to reviewing and discussing different modeling results to see what can be learned from them. 
  + A TWG member said that the TWG should define which model is appropriate for specific questions rather than running all questions with all models.
* The project team said that part of their mandate is starting to evaluate all models and resources available. The TWG needs to explore additional resources if they are needed and support from TWG members is very likely going to be needed in the fall. 
  + A TWG member said that DWR will be releasing the latest version of the CalSim Model that includes the Incidental Take Permit (ITP). 
  + A TWG member said that it would be helpful for the group to run through an example to decide how much work is still needed to progress a single action to the modeling stage. The TWG member said that they were struggling to see where they would be at in the fall because there is a lot of work left to do.
  + The project team said they thought the TWG is at the point of agreeing on actions that will be the focus for modeling. The project team will follow up with specific TWG members regarding water modeling needs.
* A TWG member suggested considering if climate change will be incorporated into modeling runs once the model frameworks are decided. 
* A TWG member said that the TWG needs to be realistic about how much uncertainty is in each of the models. Some of these models are really complex and a range of impacts from the modeling should be considered to get ballpark results to evaluate whether the actions are going to be beneficial. 
* A TWG member said that the TWG first needs to consider actions that provide real benefits to Delta Smelt in the next five years.
  + A TWG member agreed and said that the immediate benefits should be considered first. Climate change is important in the long run but is less critical in the near-term. 
* A TWG member asked if smaller work groups should be scheduled to better define each of the actions since it would be a separate conversation than deciding how to model an action.
  + A TWG member stated that they are concerned with decisions being made in the smaller work groups that differ from what the overall TWG thinks. 
  + The project team will consider assembling small work groups to further discuss actions.

## Next Steps and Work Planning
***

*Upcoming Meetings*

The project team will work on the Draft Phase 2 Report and online supporting documentation in July and August and anticipates that the TWG will review the drafts in September. The project team reviewed the upcoming meeting in July and said that they would circulate a Doodle Poll for September meeting dates.

* Thursday, July 23 from 1:00-4:00 p.m.