# Technical Working Group Meeting 21
***
 
**June 26, 2020**
 
## Participants
***
 
### Technical Working Group
* Shawn Acuña, Metropolitan Water District (MWD)
* Mike Beakes, United States Bureau of Reclamation (USBR)
* Bill Bennett, UC Davis, John Muir Institute of the Environment and Center for Watershed Sciences
* Larry Brown, United States Geological Survey (USGS)
* Erin Cole, United States Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS)
* Lauren Damon, Interagency Ecological Program (IEP)
* Scott Hamilton, Coalition for a Sustainable Delta
* Sam Luoma, UC Davis, John Muir Institute of the Environment
* Deanna Sereno, Contra Costa Water District (CCWD)
* Will Smith, United States Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS)
* Ted Sommer, California Department of Water Resources (DWR)
* Kate Spear, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)

### Project Team
* Mary Beth Day, Kearns & West
* Alyson Scurlock, Kearns & West 
* Graham Long, Compass Resource Management
* Dan Ohlson, Compass Resource Management
* Bruce DiGennaro, The Essex Partnership
* Mike Urkov, FlowWest

### Guest Observer
* Brycen Swart, California Department of Fish and Wildlife (CDFW)

## Action Items
***
* Compass to clean up actions spreadsheet and circulate to TWG members by 7/1.
* Kearns & West to circulate Bill’s two-pager on developing food actions.
* Kearns & West to send calendar invites for July TWG meetings.

## Key Agreements or Outcomes
***
TWG members agreed with the proposal to evaluate urgent and long-term actions and continuing the exploration and development of pre-feasibility actions. TWG members generally supported the approach for binning actions, although some reservations were raised. 

## Introductions
***
The project team reviewed the agenda, meeting guidelines, and attendance roster for TWG members.

## Working Group Discussion – Management Actions
***
The project team discussed the preliminary binning and prioritizing of candidate management actions based on discussions with the TWG and Steering Committee. The questions that could be considered for each action are:

1. What is the timeline for the action to provide benefits for Delta Smelt?  
2. What is the potential scale of benefits? 
3. What is the magnitude of cost/other adverse effects? 

The project team discussed the urgency for actions to provide an immediate benefit for Delta Smelt recovery as the goal for the SDM effort and asked for feedback from the TWG.

* A TWG member noted that urgency is really important, but that long-term actions should not be excluded. The TWG member suggested considering a portfolio of actions that include both short term and long-term actions. 
* A TWG member shared a figure that they created to help conceptualize how to optimize tradeoffs for Delta Smelt. 
  + The project team will share the two-pager and figure with the TWG.
  + A TWG member said that they liked the figure and emphasized that while there is risk with some of the actions, there may be ways to manage and reduce that risk. 

The project team discussed the possible schedule for the next phase of work that would ultimately lead to recommendations for adaptive management and the Science Plan. The TWG could focus on Summer/Fall actions during the first round (October 2020 to March 2021) of SDM to develop recommendations that would be useful for 2021. Concurrently, the TWG could take part in ongoing exploration of pre-feasibility actions to narrow in on another suite of actions to evaluate during the second round (April 2021 to September 2022) of SDM. The project team asked for feedback from the TWG. 

* A TWG member agreed with focusing on Summer/Fall actions first but said that the TWG should not be constrained only by the Biological Opinion (BiOp) and Incidental Take Permits (ITP).
* A TWG member stated that it seems like the TWG’s focus is being narrowed and asked how likely it was that ongoing exploration of less developed actions would occur while giving phased upfront focus on Summer/Fall actions during the first round. 
  + The project team said that there was support for evaluating Summer/Fall actions while having ongoing development of other actions, so they would develop an approach for working on both tasks concurrently. 
* The project team noted that the Steering Committee also requested that the TWG coordinates efforts with the Delta Coordination Group to avoid being redundant. 
* A TWG member asked if the SDM process for evaluating Summer/Fall actions includes only regulatory actions from the BiOp and ITP and if it has been decided that the Summer/Fall life stage is the highest priority. 
  + The project team said that they have communicated with the Steering Committee that the TWG would not be constrained only by what exists in the regulatory documents. The TWG is a CSAMP initiative and has a broader umbrella to explore and combine actions. The project team said that juvenile bottleneck has been a central topic of discussion from the start and evaluating Summer/Fall actions would be helpful for considering urgent actions that could be implemented in 2021.
* A TWG member warned of being careful of why one life stage is being promoted over another. 
  + A TWG member said that the Life Cycle Model suggests that summer is a more important period for mortality than fall, although the model did not indicate fall was unimportant. Spring is important for recruitment. 
  + The project team said that the underlying logic for focusing the first round on Summer/Fall actions is that they inform implementation actions in 2021. Exploring the recruitment phase seems to be a longer-term task that might inform actions by 2022. 

The project team discussed the categories for binning actions and reviewed specific actions and their assigned categories in the candidate management actions spreadsheet. 

* The project team noted that many of the temperature and turbidity actions fall into the pre-feasibility stage (Bin 2).  
* A TWG member said that the approach for binning actions seemed straightforward and logical.
  + A TWG member agreed that it seems like a logical approach. They need to see how it works out, but it looks like a way forward if TWG members are comfortable with it.   
* A TWG member said that some of the actions in the spreadsheet are smaller actions that could contribute to larger actions and asked if there was a way to view them in that context. A few small actions combined may have greater priority.  
  + A TWG member agreed that some of the temperature actions are relatively small-scale and have already been implemented or could be implemented. The TWG member suggested that there could be a way to choose a suite of smaller actions that could provide a cumulative benefit over a larger area. 
* The project team noted that the goal of the binning exercise is to develop tangible next steps for how to explore some of the ideas linked to the Summer/Fall actions. They suggested that small groups could be formed to further explore and advance the development of some of the candidate management actions. 
* A TWG member suggested that the binning exercise highlighted how complicated and lengthy a process binning the actions will be and asked if there was a more streamlined process to bin actions.
  + The project team said that they could estimate the binning category for each action in the spreadsheet and then distribute it for TWG members to flag any binning categories they disagree with. 
  + A TWG member suggested having TWG members assign binning categories for each action in the spreadsheet. The averages of all of the numbers could be used as an alternative.

## Next Steps and Work Planning
***

*Upcoming Meetings*

The project team reviewed the July meeting dates.  
* Friday, July 10 from 9:00-12:00 p.m.
* Thursday, July 23 from 1:00-4:00 p.m.
 