# Technical Working Group Meeting 7
***
 
**January 10, 2020**
 
## Participants
***
 
### Technical Working Group
* Shawn Acuña, Metropolitan Water District (MWD)
* Bill Bennett, UC Davis, John Muir Institute of the Environment and Center for Watershed Sciences
* Larry Brown, United States Geological Survey (USGS)
* Erin Cole, United States Fish & Wildlife Service (FWS)
* Lauren Damon, Interagency Ecological Program (IEP)
* Ben Geske, Delta Science Program (DSP)
* Scott Hamilton, Coalition for a Sustainable Delta
* Sam Luoma, UC Davis, John Muir Institute of the Environment
* Randall Mager, California Department of Water Resources (DWR)
* Deanna Sereno, Contra Costa Water District (CCWD)
* Kate Spear, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
* Will Smith, United States Fish & Wildlife Service (FWS)
 
### Project Team
* Mary Beth Day, Kearns & West
* Nora De Cuir, Kearns & West 
* Bruce DiGennaro, The Essex Partnership
* Graham Long, Compass Resource Management
* Dan Ohlson, Compass Resource Management
 
## Action Items
***
* Shawn and Bill to coordinate with Jim Hobbs on additional data/analysis.
* TWG members to share with Bruce any recommendations for biologists who might be able to offer project support.
* Scott to share with Dan and Graham a synopsis of topics he could present to the TWG.
 
## Key Agreements or Outcomes
***
TWG members indicated their support for the proposed format of documenting key effects pathways, lines of evidence, references, modeling approaches, objectives, performance measures, and candidate management actions. The group agreed to hold the full day modeling session on March 13 and shorten the February 10 meeting to a half day webinar.
 
## Introductions
***
The Project Team reviewed the agenda and TWG members introduced themselves.
 
## Working Group Discussion
***
*Presentation on Delta Smelt Selective Mortality and Juvenile Bottleneck*
Bill Bennett (UC Davis/The Bay Institute) shared an overview of selective mortality in delta smelt and the juvenile to subadult bottleneck.
 
* Delta smelt population dynamics are dominated by the recruitment process.
* Size selective mortality influences survival to the juvenile period.
  + Data from 2005 suggests fish that were spawned earlier in the year tend to survive into the fall.
* The juvenile bottleneck occurs annually, but the severity of the bottleneck varies from year to year.
  + Temperature is a major factor influencing the severity of the juvenile bottleneck.
  
*Discussion of Delta Smelt Selective Mortality and Juvenile Bottleneck*
The group discussed how the relative survival of fish with slower versus faster growth rates can vary throughout the year.
 
* Bill cautioned that the 2005 data could be affected by the small sample size, but overall the data suggests that the relative survival of delta smelt is different in July than November or December.
* A TWG member asked how the group could incorporate the growth effect and time effect suggested by the 2005 data into a lifecycle model.
* A TWG member suggested looking into Jim Hobbs’s temperature metrics in the DOP Report as a potential way to link spawning to survival rate.
* A TWG member asked if two hypotheses could be drawn from the 2005 data:
  + Fish born earlier in the year have a higher survival rate.
  + Fish with a lower growth rate have a higher survival rate.
    - Bill clarified that fish born earlier in the year grow more slowly in the first two weeks of life because temperatures are colder at that time. By the summer, these fish may be relatively large because they are one to two months older than fish spawned later in the year.
* A TWG member asked why fish born in May, when temperatures are relatively warm, would have slow growth rates for the first 14 days.
  + Bill replied that there can be a period of reduced food availability in late April to May, and this can also affect growth rate. He noted that the small sample size might be a factor as well.
* A TWG member remarked that this data seemed counterintuitive, as they would expect faster growing fish to survive to the end of the year.
  + Bill noted that the small sample size might affect the results.
  + Bill also pointed out that although “bigger is better” is commonly assumed to be true, there are many instances where that pattern does not hold.
 
The group discussed potential mechanisms that would lead to reduced survival in faster growing fish.
 
* A member suggested that smelt might become more vulnerable to predation once they reach a certain size.
* Another member noted that foraging theory predicts that hungry fish move around more and therefore expose themselves to higher rates of predation.
* The group confirmed that the smelt lifecycle model assumes larger fish are at an advantage, and there is currently no mechanism for greater mortality due to faster growth in the model.
 
The group discussed using otolith data, particularly from fish collected in the fall midwater trawl survey, to further explore the relationship between growth and mortality.
 
* TWG members agreed to contact Jim Hobbs about additional otolith data and/or analyses.
 
A TWG member asked why the mean length of adult delta smelt dropped around 1990.
 
* Bill explained that this shift has been attributed to food, but he believes it is related to high March X2, which leads to more entrainment of juveniles.
* Bill also emphasized that different hypotheses might apply to different years.
 
A TWG member asked if there was a relationship between food and survival early in the lives of delta smelt.
 
* Bill replied that he is not aware of a relationship, but that could be due to a lack of data. It is difficult to scale food data to delta smelt diets.
* A TWG member noted that glycogen depletion seems to be too sensitive to use as a means of examining a relationship between food and survival.
 
A TWG member asked how the group could parameterize Bill’s observations that delta smelt that hatch earlier have lower spring survival but higher fall survival, while later hatching delta smelt have higher spring survival but lower summer and fall survival.
 
* Bill indicated he wasn’t sure but would consider how to do so.
* A TWG member noted the current life cycle model incorporates the opposite pattern, based on the traditional idea that smaller fish have higher mortality due to starvation. At present, the only mechanism that relates growth to survival in the model is starvation.
 
A TWG member noted the group may need to carry forward competing hypotheses on this issue, or consider a sensitivity analysis to provide clarity.
 
* Another TWG member suggested a conceptual model might be a more effective tool than the bioenergetics model in this instance.
 
*Documentation Templates*
The Compass team reviewed draft templates for documenting the current phase of the structured decision making process. They explained that they envisioned developing two documents. The first would include conceptual diagrams of the key effects pathways for each life stage transition. The diagrams would link to a record of what was understood with confidence, lines of evidences, references, and a proposed approach to modeling for each pathway. The second document would record objectives, performances measures, and candidate management actions.
 
* TWG members commented that they liked the proposed format for the documents and felt they were a helpful way to organize information.
* A TWG member asked where any analyses undertaken by the group would be recorded.
  + Compass replied that they would be included in the document appendices.
 
The Compass team indicated they would begin to develop these documents by starting with the highest priority (i.e. rated “A” by the group) topics and gathering information from key resources such as the MAST report and forthcoming FLOAT MAST report.
 
* The Project Team noted they were looking for additional resources to help support this effort, and asked TWG members to share any suggestions for biologists who might be available to assist.
The group agreed that the Compass team would share their progress on documentation at the next meeting.
 
## Next Steps and Work Planning
***
*Upcoming Meetings*
 
* The next meeting will be a webinar on Friday, January 24 from 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m.
* The full day, in-person meeting scheduled for Monday, February 10 will be shortened to a morning webinar.
* The full day modeling session will now be held on Friday, March 13 in Sacramento.
* The Project Team and TWG members will continue to coordinate on identifying experts to give presentations on the remaining priority topics. 
