# Technical Working Group Meeting 8
***
 
**January 24, 2020**
 
## Participants
***
 
### Technical Working Group
* Shawn Acuña, Metropolitan Water District (MWD)
* Mike Beakes, United States Bureau of Reclamation (USBR)
* Bill Bennett, UC Davis, John Muir Institute of the Environment and Center for Watershed Sciences
* Larry Brown, United States Geological Survey (USGS)
* Lauren Damon, Interagency Ecological Program (IEP)
* Ben Geske, Delta Science Program (DSP)
* Scott Hamilton, Coalition for a Sustainable Delta
* Sam Luoma, UC Davis, John Muir Institute of the Environment
* Randall Mager, California Department of Water Resources (DWR)
* Kate Spear, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)

### Project Team
* Mary Beth Day, Kearns & West
* Nora De Cuir, Kearns & West
* Graham Long, Compass Resource Management
* Dan Ohlson, Compass Resource Management

## Action Items
***
* TWG members to share any additional feedback on the adult to larvae pathway diagram. 
* TWG members to share with the Project Team any recommendations for potential technical project support.
* Compass to update the adult to larvae pathway diagram based on TWG feedback.
* Compass to develop pathway diagrams for the remaining life stage transitions.
* Compass to develop and share a framework for brainstorming candidate management actions.
* Project Team to coordinate with potential expert speakers for the February 28 meeting.

## Key Agreements or Outcomes
***
The TWG supports the logic of the proposed diagram and supports the creation of a diagram for each life stage. Diagrams and the candidate management actions they contain will be informed by extensive references and key discussion points housed within a supporting document. The goal at this stage is to consider all potential actions with benefit; assessment of costs and related analysis will come later in the process.

## Introductions
***
The Project Team reviewed the agenda and TWG members introduced themselves.

## Working Group Discussion
***
*Presentation on Draft Structure for Documenting Key Effects Pathways that Link Candidate Management Actions with Objectives*
The Compass Team presented a draft diagram documenting key effects pathways that link candidate management actions with objectives. The diagram focuses on life stage transition from adult to larvae and attempts to capture anything that affects that pathway. It starts with the fundamental objective of increasing abundance of larvae and focuses on growth, fecundity and survival of adults as critical sub-objectives. The Project Team notes that each “node” – known as A01-A31 within the diagram, will link to key references related to that action or life stage. Ultimately, there will be a diagram for each life stage. 

*Discussion of Diagram for Documenting Key Effects Pathways that Link Candidate Management Actions with Objectives*
The Project Team asks the TWG if there is agreement on the primary objective and logic of the diagram. 

* TWG member note that the objective needs to reflect improved quality of larvae not just quantity.  
* TWG member notes that distribution is also a factor (we should think about their historic range).
  + TWG group members agree that it is important for adults to spawn in the right place and may be a component of increased survival. 
* The Project Team asks if this relates directly to the need for quality stationary habitat and a TWG member confirms, but also notes the importance of transient habitat.

As an example, the Project Team focuses on Temperature Actions to explore the logic of the diagram. The Project Team refers to Lauren Damon’s (IEP) presentation, noting that both water temperature and food can affect fecundity and therefore abundance of larvae.

* In response, Lauren clarifies that food availability is more about egg quality. 
* A TWG member notes that both abundance and quality of food may impact egg quality, but it is difficult to separate them. 
* Time of year may also be a factor and the Project Team notes that the current diagram captures only winter/spring life stage and agrees to make another diagram to capture other life stages which happen at other times of year. 

The Project Team asks if there are there temperature actions or flow actions that can be taken to change the pathway.

* A TWG member clarifies that ambient temperature of natural water has little effect and that air temperature is the real driver.  
* A TWG member notes that there are actions that can be taken to cool water at dams but questions whether it is practical with regard to salmonids and whether managers would be willing to do it. The TWG member continued to observe that there is not much to be done which is why discussion is focused on creating appropriate transient habitat where water temperatures are cooler.
  + The Project Team reminds the TWG to focus only on potential benefits of management actions at this stage of the process and that assessment of costs will come later.

The Project Team shows the overall diagram and asks for general feedback on logic or other aspects that might inform candidate actions.  The Team notes that it is using color and boxes to help visually describe what is important.

* Several members of the TWG agree that the preliminary logic works. 
* A TWG member notes that the importance of turbidity is a function of scale – matters a lot at a small scale but not over the whole estuary and as such would be a blunt tool. 
* A TWG member notes that water temperature probably doesn’t have an effect on fecundity. If it does have effects, it is probably on growth and survival.
* A TWG member asks how to include actions that are already being taken, for example with regard to entrainment. Are we proposing to reconsider existing actions?
  + The Project Team responds that this is a policy and scope question for the DSM process and something that will be discussed at Steering Committee level. At a minimum, they will include a quick synopsis of all current management within the key references.
* A TWG member agrees that it will be good not to limit thinking to what is currently done, but rather what could be done in an un-impaired system.
* This comment is seconded by a TWG member, who notes that a decision could be made to stop an existing action.
* A TWG member notes that there are a lot of interactions between elements in the diagram’s central gray box: food availability, predation rates, and stationary habitat and entrainment rates. Specifically notes that contaminants are affected by flow and asks if an arrow should be added to contaminants. 
  + The Project Team agree to make this change.
* Another TWG member comments that contaminants are important to consider, but it will be important to note at what level as contaminants alone don’t drive population. 
  + A TWG member notes that this may be the case with many pathways.
  + A second TWG member suggests that discussion of the various pathways will serve as the location to provide evidence.
* A TWG member comments that arrows from the Hatchery Production of Adults may be premature, though this happens in the fall. However, this should remain as it is a potential action.
  + The Project Team notes that A33 needs to be moved and added to previous life stage.
* A TWG member asks how to capture additional habitat in the diagram?
  + The Project team notes that that would be captured through A21- Stationary Habitat.
  + A TWG member suggests it might also be captured through A16 – Flow.

The Project Team explains that a diagram like this will be created for each life stage, which will be brought to the TWG to review and confirm. Specifically, the Project team is looking for assistance with wording and to tease out disagreements. Ultimately, these diagrams will be part of a document that serves as a technical supplement to the SDM report. 

* A TWG member asks why all the pathways/arrows are labeled as A’s? 
  + The Project Team clarifies that the A’s correspond to this specific life stage. 
* A TWG member asks how this will be used by managers and how the limiting factors in a given year will be reflected.
  + The Project Team explains that limiting factors will be included as one of the priority discussion headings. 

The Project Team is working to systematically build the diagram and to include all the key references and will be looking to TWG to assist with them. The Project Team is also looking for assistance in documenting all these references – send any suggestions to the Project Team. Project Team would also welcome assistance from TWG in summarizing and synthesizing this information.  

* A TWG member asks what the plan is for collecting suggestions for candidate actions from the group.
* A TWG member suggests that a brainstorming session would be good; but also beneficial to have a mechanism for members to share ideas directly with Project Team.
* A TWG member suggests that it may be helpful to share criteria with the group. Criteria will be particularly important when it comes to evaluating candidate actions.
* The Project Team agrees to come up with method for brainstorming ideas, which it will share with the TWG. 

Project Team notes that the March meeting will provide an opportunity to explore various models, see how this diagram aligns or doesn’t.

* A TWG member notes that it will be important to have a plan for when we don’t have a good model to represent a linkage; when a numerical model doesn’t match the conceptual model.
* The Project Team responds that the diagram will be the place to document all linkages regardless of challenges that may arise in modeling. The document will be the place to record what we do or don’t know about those linkages. 

Project Team requests suggestions for potential speakers on topics of interest.

* Shawn Acuña (MWD) to present on contaminants with Fong et. al.? Nora De Cuir (K&W) to assist in lining that up. 
* Larry Brown (USGS) to present on transient habitat.

## Next Steps and Work Planning
***

* The Project Team will continue work on diagrams for other life stages. Plan to circulate in advance of next meeting. 
* February 10 meeting targeted for a structured brainstorming meeting on actions. 
* Project Team will pursue a presenter for February 28 meeting.
* Larry offers to present at March 27 meeting.
* A TWG member suggests Matt Nobriga for predation; Bill Bennet and Brad Cavallo could also present on that topic at the same meeting.

*Upcoming Meetings*

* Monday, February 10 from 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. 
* Friday, February 28 from 9:00 a.m. am to 12:00 p.m.