# Technical Working Group Meeting 24
***
 
**October 30, 2020**
 
## Participants
***
 
### Technical Working Group
* Shawn Acuña, Metropolitan Water District (MWD)
* Mike Beakes, United States Bureau of Reclamation (USBR)
* Bill Bennett, UC Davis, John Muir Institute of the Environment and Center for Watershed Sciences
* Larry Brown, United States Geological Survey (USGS)
* Erin Cole, United States Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS)
* Lauren Damon, Interagency Ecological Program (IEP)
* Ben Geske, Delta Science Program (DSP)
* Scott Hamilton, Coalition for a Sustainable Delta
* Sam Luoma, UC Davis, John Muir Institute of the Environment
* Randall Mager, California Department of Water Resources (DWR)
* Deanna Sereno, Contra Costa Water District (CCWD)
* Will Smith, United States Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS)

### Project Team
* Mary Beth Day, Kearns & West
* Alyson Scurlock, Kearns & West 
* Graham Long, Compass Resource Management
* Dan Ohlson, Compass Resource Management
* Sally Rudd, Compass Resource Management
* Connor Robinson, Compass Resource Management
* Bruce DiGennaro, Essex

### Guest Observers 
* Rosemary Hartman, California Department of Water Resources (DWR)
* Brian Mahardja, United States Bureau of Reclamation (USBR)
* Brycen Swart, California Department of Fish and Wildlife (CDFW)

## Action Items
***
* Compass and Bruce to review TWG membership moving into Phase 3 to ensure comprehensive representation, including CDFW and overlap with DCG.
* Compass to revise the Phase 2 Report based on TWG feedback.
  + Compass to coordinate with model leads to revise documentation of available tools.
* Compass to develop a Doodle Poll to help schedule next TWG meeting (week of 12/14).
* TWG members to coordinate with Compass if they have interest/availability to assist with the bioenergetics models in Phase 3.
* Compass to share spreadsheet with TWG members to capture next steps on candidate management actions.
  + Once small groups are identified, Compass will follow up with the appropriate TWG members.

## Key Agreements or Outcomes
***
TWG members agreed that the Phase 2 Report needs further clarification and wordsmithing, constructive suggestions were provided. TWG members were in favor of using the supporting online documentation moving forward.

## Introductions
***
The project team reviewed the agenda, meeting guidelines, and attendance roster for TWG members.

## Working Group Discussion 
***
The project team reviewed major comments received from TWG members on the Phase 2 Report and asked TWG members for further feedback.

* A TWG member noted that it is important to spend time reviewing and clarifying each section of the report to ensure it is comprehensive. This report is important and will be viewed by stakeholders.  
  + A TWG member noted that some areas of the report cover topics that have not been resolved yet and should not be written as if there was agreement. The TWG member suggested that the report could be reduced in size and focus most on documenting what the TWG has done and agreed on so far. 
  + A TWG member agreed, suggesting that there could be better wordsmithing in the report. Many statements were written as if there was consensus and that was not always the case. 
  + A TWG member suggested that much of the report could be framed as ongoing discussions instead of issues where was consensus and noted that every step in Phase 2 took longer than anticipated due to in-depth conversations. It is important to provide context in the report that Phase 3 will also likely take longer to complete.  
  + A TWG member suggested using a neutral writing style rather than suggested that things were known or factual. 
* A TWG member said that the report should outline how the TWG’s work feeds into the work being done by the Delta Coordination Group (DCG). There should also be overlap between TWG members and the DCG if there is not already.  
  + The project team agreed that is it important to understand how the TWG’s efforts coordinate with the DCG for efficiency. The project team will make sure there is a representative that sits on both groups. 
* A TWG member suggested using “dynamic abiotic habitat” instead of “transient habitat.” 
  + A TWG member said that habitat is comprehensive and includes abiotic and biotic elements. 
  + TWG members agreed to use “dynamic abiotic conditions” consistently in the Phase 2 Report. 
* TWG members suggested clarifying the documentation of modeling resources by providing detailed information about each model. A table or matrix could be used to see the tradeoffs between each model.
  + A TWG member said that detail should be added about what happens when two models produce conflicting results.
  + A TWG member suggested that the models being evaluated do not have equal weight. It is important to include information regarding the validations conducted for each model and models should be viewed only as a predictive or analytical tool. 
  + A TWG member agreed that model validation is an important component of interpreting model results. 
  + The project team will develop a structured way to document the models and will reach out to TWG members who presented a model or analysis to ensure the information in the report is accurate.
* The project team asked TWG members if the online supporting documentation was an approach that they would want to continue using moving forward.
  + TWG members agreed with the direction to use the online supporting documentation as it is a useful way to organize the literature around the TWG’s thinking and approach.
  + A TWG member noted that without appropriate background information viewers could get easily lost using the tool as things get more specific. 
  + The project team suggested having an executive summary on the front page.
  + A TWG member noted that the executive summary should reflect that the TWG is evaluating a portfolio of actions.
* The project team suggested that the categories for binning actions do not add a lot of value in the documentation at this time since most actions fall into the pre-feasibility stage (Bin 2). The project team suggested scaling back information in the candidate management actions spreadsheet.
  + TWG members agreed that the definitions for actions are premature and the binning categories are not especially useful at this time. 
* The project team will revise the Phase 2 Report based on feedback from the TWG. 

## Next Steps and Work Planning for Phase 3 
***
The project team reviewed the main goals, schedule, and work streams for Phase 3 of the SDM process, which is anticipated to begin in November.

* A TWG member suggested that there may actions worth examining but they lack the analytical tools or expertise to evaluate them. The TWG member suggested phrasing the question as, “Can the action be evaluated in more detail this year?” instead of, “Is the action worth examining in more detail this year?”. 
  + The project team suggested changing the question to, “Should the action be examined in more detail this year?”. Certain actions can be placed in a “parking lot.”
  + A TWG member suggested having an additional box to place actions that require a knowledge gap to be built. 
* A TWG member suggested that additional TWG members could help run and contribute to the Bioenergetics Model to avoid the work falling on one person only. 
* A TWG member suggested that some of the actions the TWG is hoping to evaluate will have effects on other actions that other groups may be evaluating. Because another group is working on a similar action does not mean the action should not be included in TWG’s evaluation. 
* A TWG member suggested that it is important to have further brainstorm sessions within the TWG for how best to specify an action. There are a lot of members who have insight into actions and what scenarios may not make sense.
  + A TWG member agreed that there needs to be more discussion early on for specifying actions appropriately to ensure that actions are well thought out.  
* The project team reviewed next steps for actions in the candidate management actions spreadsheet, including forming small work groups.
  + A TWG member noted that there should be representation from CDFW in the TWG. 
  + The project team will circulate the spreadsheet for TWG members to identify the actions that they would like to discuss in detail as part of a small group.  
* The project team will send out a Doodle Poll for the week of December 14 and will aim to establish a standing monthly meeting thereafter. 

