# Technical Working Group Meeting 18
***
 
**May 29, 2020**
 
## Participants
***
 
### Technical Working Group
* Mike Beakes, United States Bureau of Reclamation (USBR)
* Larry Brown, United States Geological Survey (USGS)
* Erin Cole, United States Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS)
* Lauren Damon, Interagency Ecological Program (IEP)
* Scott Hamilton, Coalition for a Sustainable Delta
* Randall Mager, California Department of Water Resources (DWR)
* Sam Luoma, UC Davis, John Muir Institute of the Environment
* Deanna Sereno, Contra Costa Water District (CCWD)
* Will Smith, United States Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS)

### Project Team
* Mary Beth Day, Kearns & West
* Alyson Scurlock, Kearns & West 
* Graham Long, Compass Resource Management
* Dan Ohlson, Compass Resource Management
* Bruce DiGennaro, The Essex Partnership
* Mike Urkov, FlowWest

### Guest Presenter
* Dennis Murphy, University of Nevada, Reno (UNR)

### Guest Observers 
* Brycen Swart, California Department of Fish and Wildlife (CDFW)
* Rosemary Hartman, California Department of Water Resources (DWR)
* Rod Wittler, United States Bureau of Reclamation (USBR)
* Lenny Grimaldo, ICF

## Action Items
***
* Scott to distribute the draft Performance Analysis manuscript when ready.
* After review, any TWG members who would like to suggest covariates for inclusion in the Performance Analysis should forward their ideas to Scott.
* Scott to follow-up with Mike Beakes (Z-scoring), Shawn and Sam (how address contaminants), and Will (how integrate simulation testing).  
* Scott to highlight the current list of candidate management actions suggested by the both the Affinity Analysis and the Performance Analysis.
* Will to highlight the current list of candidate management actions suggested by the Life Cycle Model.

## Key Agreements or Outcomes
***
TWG members agreed that there is uncertainty associated with both the Performance Analysis and the Life Cycle Model. TWG members supported the idea of exploring both as potential tools moving forward. 

## Introductions
***
The project team reviewed the agenda and attendance roster for TWG members.

## Working Group Discussion – Performance Analysis
***

*Presentation on The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly Years for Delta Smelt*

Scott Hamilton (Coalition for a Sustainable Delta) and Dennis Murphy (UNR) followed up on their Affinity Analysis presentation (shared at the previous TWG meeting) by providing an overview of the Performance Analysis framework. Their Performance Analysis builds off of the conceptual model and factors identified in the 2015 MAST report and uses data from different years to explore if there are additional factors that determine Delta Smelt performance outside of habitat quality. Performance Analysis can be used as a tool in the structured decision making process to help inform a comprehensive set of management actions, identify actions that are not likely to influence Delta Smelt performance, and help evaluate the effectiveness of actions.

*Discussion on Performance Analysis*

The group discussed Scott and Dennis’ presentation. 

* A TWG member noted that most of the variables looked like they had a linear relationship and asked if any interactions between covariates were explored. 
  + Scott said that they only considered simple linear relationships and used S-shaped curves for covariates. The model automatically picks up some interactions between covariates, such as between food and turbidity, while some relationships between other interactions would need to be estimated separately, such as between water temperature and food.
* A TWG member asked if Z-scoring the independent variables was considered because it could be less sensitive than scaling the variables from zero to one. Z-scoring transforms all the independent variables into standard deviations, making sure the range captures the general distribution. 
  + Scott said the model is designed to have variables from zero to one and asked how Z-transformations could be converted into that range. 
  + The TWG member said that they would need to read more about the model to see how the model is fit.
  + Scott suggested that a different version of the model could be run using Z-scoring to see how the results compare. 
* Scott asked the TWG if entrainment at a powerplant is a factor that influences Delta Smelt abundance. They are considering this mechanism as additional validation for the model.
  + A TWG member responded that powerplant operations have been dramatically changed since the 1970s-80s and studies have been published indicating that current operations have no effect on Delta Smelt abundance. 
  + Scott said that they dismissed powerplants as a current cause influencing abundance in their analysis and have only noted its occurrence. 
* A TWG member stated that they had reservations about using the Performance Analysis for management due to the model having its own set of parameters and only a single life stage which could result in multiple solutions for the same data. The TWG member suggested conducting simulation testing. 
  + Scott said the model improves on their 2018 model and essentially uses four life stages. The model looks at the limiting factor in any life stage which allows multiple limiting factors within one life cycle. Scott agreed with using simulation testing as their results have shown multiple solutions for the same data. 
* A project team member suggested that Scott should summarize which management actions he anticipates would be suggested using the Performance Analysis. This list can be compared to the actions being identified through the candidate management action process.
  + Scott said he would be happy to combine the Affinity Analysis and Performance Analysis studies and generate a list to distribute to the group. 
* A TWG member pointed out that the model validation does not fit very well and asked why the group should be convinced to use the Performance Analysis for action selection based on the model validating poorly and predicting some years incorrectly.
  + Scott suggested not relying on one model even if the model produced good validation results. He suggested thinking about what the model informs and why and looking at how the model performance compares to other models as next steps.
  + The TWG member emphasized that validation says a lot about the usefulness of a model. 
  + Scott recommended against going back to a univariate analysis because it will not validate nearly as well. 
* A TWG member said that they think the Performance Analysis takes the conceptual model to the next level, but they need to see the written product and work through it to formulate an opinion. They expressed concern over the temporal aspect of the model but acknowledged it is the nature of the data. The TWG member does not have an issue using the model as a tool but would not solely rely on it.
  + Scott said that they will share the draft Performance Analysis manuscript for feedback when it is ready, including collaboration on specification of covariates.

## Working Group Discussion – Life Cycle Model
***

*Presentation on The Delta Smelt Life Cycle Model: Disentangling Entrainment from Natural Mortality*

Will Smith (FWS) shared an overview of the Delta Smelt Life Cycle Model, focusing on observed Delta Smelt entrainment. The Life Cycle Model is a stage-based model that is nonspatial which may limit the model application for this structured decision making process.

*Discussion on Life Cycle Model*

The group discussed Will’s presentation. 

* A guest observer asked what time period the subadult survival data is from. They generally assume the subadult life stage is when the fish turns one before January 1st.
  + Will said that naming by life stage can be confusing and that he prefers to identify by month. The model is a stage-based model that is really based on time and season rather than life stage.
* A TWG member said that they thought the Life Cycle Model had four regions.
  + Will suggested that the TWG member was thinking of strata used for fish surveys. The Life Cycle Model is nonspatial and the data required to convert it to a spatial model does not exist at the moment. 
* A TWG member asked what the survival rate is normally for this period and how much worse it gets with entrainment. The TWG member also asked Will if he had developed proportional entrainment loss estimates with the Life Cycle Model and if he had estimates for adults as well.
  + Will said that they can develop estimates for survival rate by looking at the ratio of entrainment mortality to total mortality. Will displayed a time series graph showing proportional entrainment loss estimates post-larvae and said that adult values would be easy to present and typically fall in the zero to two range.
  + The TWG member suggested that the adult values were lower than other estimates and asked Will if he has tried to reconcile the differences.
  + Will said that he had not but suggested that there may be a positive bias of fish in the Delta and that he would like to see a table of the origins of all the entrained particles.
  + A guest observer noted that entrainment losses estimated using different methods vary over time and all follow a pattern from high to low. 
  + Will agreed that temporal trends and entrainment have been consistent regardless of method. Mortality has decreased since the early 2000s.
* A TWG member asked what model validation was used.
  + Will said they ran a cross validation, analyzed observed versus predicted values, and did extensive stimulation testing. For the most part, the model validated well.  
* A guest observer asked if Will thought the relationship between Old and Middle River (OMR) flow and secchi depth is cause and effect. 
  + Will said that is likely beyond the scope of the Life Cycle Model. He thinks a potential flaw in the model is that it assumes mortality outside of entrainment has not changed in the South Delta, which may cause entrainment methods in recent years to be negatively biased. 
  + A TWG member suggested looking at secchi depth in other regions and that they are unsure how much of the relationship between OMR flow and secchi depth in the South Delta would be cause and effect. 
* A project team member said that other models need to be used for thinking about spatial issues and suggested that the Life Cycle Model could add value by looking at combined effects of actions. 
* A TWG member stated that they do not think there will be values like 2011 again and asked how much confidence there is in the model output regarding these probabilities.
  + Will said the model output is associated with pretty substantial uncertainty. 
  + The TWG member suggested that the model could be used more in relative effects rather than as an absolute prediction and Will agreed.
* A TWG member noted that it seems to take a perfect storm of events, including excellent and really bad years, to identify significant differences for Delta Smelt. It is difficult to predict the middle years in the Life Cycle Model and Performance Analysis which causes a lot of uncertainty in both. The TWG member suggested that it is difficult to predict quantitatively what is going to happen except in extreme situations. 
  + Will agreed that it is an accurate portrayal of the potential model limitations and that small changes are not having significant effects.
  + The TWG member noted that there was a strong Delta Smelt population before the 1990s, when there was not a perfect storm of events. 
  + Will said it seems like there was an ecosystem regime shift that caused the Delta to no longer be a favorable place for Delta Smelt, unless a year like 2011 comes along.
* A project team member asked if there were outcomes of this modeling exercise that point toward a set of candidate management actions that should be focused on, similar to the Performance Analysis.
  + Will said the model can be used for management of actions such as OMR and turbidity and that he will work on identifying a list of actions. 
* A guest observer shared the example of summer outflow and asked Will how he would use the model to predict different outcomes. The observer asked if other variables would be held constant and how that would be done if some variables are correlated with each other. 
  + Will said that they would have to account for correlation. Summer outflow is assumed to be correlated with prior spring temperature, so they would develop a linear model that uses prior spring temperature. Will said that they can alter any variables or combination of variables that they want to simulate. 
  + A TWG member said that the latest performance study showed summer outflow influences food instead of abundance. Historic relationships need to be considered and correlations versus underlying mechanisms need to be distinguished moving forward. 

## Next Steps and Work Planning
***
Will and Scott will continue to think about how they can use their respective models to help identify candidate management items moving forward.

*Upcoming Meetings*

* Friday, June 5 from 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m.
  + Guest speaker: Lenny Grimaldo (ICF) on entrainment
  + Speaker: Shawn Acuna (MWD) on Maunder and Deriso Model
* Friday, June 19 from 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m.
  + Discuss modeling needs
