# Technical Working Group Meeting 20
***
 
**June 19, 2020**
 
## Participants
***
 
### Technical Working Group
* Shawn Acuña, Metropolitan Water District (MWD)
* Mike Beakes, United States Bureau of Reclamation (USBR)
* Bill Bennett, UC Davis, John Muir Institute of the Environment and Center for Watershed Sciences 
* Larry Brown, United States Geological Survey (USGS)
* Erin Cole, United States Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS)
* Lauren Damon, Interagency Ecological Program (IEP)
* Ben Geske, Delta Science Program (DSP)
* Scott Hamilton, Coalition for a Sustainable Delta
* Sam Luoma, UC Davis, John Muir Institute of the Environment
* Randall Mager, California Department of Water Resources (DWR)
* Deanna Sereno, Contra Costa Water District (CCWD)
* Will Smith, United States Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS)

### Project Team
* Mary Beth Day, Kearns & West
* Alyson Scurlock, Kearns & West 
* Graham Long, Compass Resource Management
* Dan Ohlson, Compass Resource Management
* Bruce DiGennaro, The Essex Partnership
* Mike Urkov, FlowWest

### Guest Observers 
* Brycen Swart, California Department of Fish and Wildlife (CDFW)
* Evan Van Nieuwenhuyse, United States Bureau of Reclamation (USBR)
* Rod Wittler, United States Bureau of Reclamation (USBR)

## Action Items
***
* TWG members to complete the Doodle Poll for July Meetings by COB Wednesday (6/24).
* Compass to coordinate with TWG members for assistance binning candidate actions.
* Project team to circulate details for Franks Tract webinar.

## Key Agreements or Outcomes
***
TWG members agreed with many of the conclusions from the Life Cycle Model. TWG members supported the approach for binning actions.

## Introductions
***
The project team reviewed the agenda, meeting guidelines, and attendance roster for TWG members.

## Working Group Discussion – Management Actions
***
The project team recapped modeling tools and discussions from previous meetings, starting with the highlights and implications of the Life Cycle Model, presented by Will Smith (FWS) at the May 29 TWG Meeting. The project team asked the TWG for feedback on conclusions from the different life stages analyzed by the Life Cycle Model.

The project team reviewed the outputs from the sub-adult survival stage of the Life Cycle Model (November to February/March) and explained that success is highly correlated with turbidity in the South Delta and Old and Middle River (OMR) flows. Additionally, success is somewhat correlated with Striped Bass absence and large food availability.

* A TWG member said that they found similar and different things in their own modeling and that they liked this approach. They found OMR becomes really important in March and agreed with the suggested action to augment food. The TWG member suggested thinking about what is important as they move further into the process such as OMR flows for larvae in April. They do not see how fish can keep being taken when diverting water. 
  + A TWG member liked the point about fish-friendly diversions and expressed concern over using low turbidity as a signal. There is not much that can be done about exporting water out of the South Delta. The TWG member suggested that actions should focus on trying to limit fish at pumps or in close proximity to pumps. The models are good and informative but need to consider a biological perspective as well.
* A TWG member suggested that it makes sense that the South Delta is a good area for young fish due to food availability. 
* A TWG member agreed with success of the Delta Smelt being strongly correlated with turbidity in the South Delta. There is an issue with food and productivity (i.e. having to get rid of vegetation in order to make habitat good for spawning) as well as entrainment. The TWG member suggested that reducing Striped Bass likely would not have a large effect because Delta Smelt are too small for Striped Bass to seek out as prey.
  + A TWG member agreed that there is not a significant amount of Striped Bass that forage on Delta Smelt. The TWG member said that a better index would be the two to four age range.
* A project team member asked for thoughts about aquatic vegetation in the South Delta and actions on dealing with it.
  + A TWG member said that Delta Smelt avoid habitat in the South Delta because they do not like boundaries and bumping into things. Delta Smelt need a wide-open environment and do not feed or spawn in weeds. 
  + A TWG member said that open water habitat has been reduced over the years especially with warmer temperatures. 
  + A TWG member stated that they think weeds are a huge barrier in the South Delta. Not that long ago, Delta Smelt were spawning in the lower San Joaquin. If OMR gets too high there, they all get sucked down. If the lower San Joaquin is going to be spawning habitat, OMR cannot get too high.
  + A TWG member suggested that nobody knows where Delta Smelt actually spawn and there is not enough information to justify actions.
* A project team member identified fish-friendly diversions and weeds in the South Delta as actions that are being broadly explored and asked the group if these actions should be near term or long-term actions.
  + A TWG member clarified that the habitat in the South Delta used to be good habitat in the last 10 to 20 years.
  + A TWG member suggested restoration of Franks Tract and asked if there were other actions that would improve habitat if Franks Tract is not relevant.
  + A TWG member said that restoration of Franks Tract is relatively defined and likely to yield success in a short period of time.
  + A project team member said that they would share the latest designs under consideration for Franks Tract with the TWG.

The project team reviewed the outputs from the recruitment stage of the Life Cycle Model (March to June) and explained that temperature is highly correlated with recruitment. Large food availability and X2 from the previous fall is somewhat correlated. 

* A TWG member agreed with the temperature correlation. Their model did not pick up the relationship with food and they thought food during the winter and spring would have a stronger influence on recruitment. 
  + A TWG member said that temperature is the primary driver of the Life Cycle Model.
* A project team member suggested that any possible temperature actions need to be considered.

The project team reviewed outputs from the post-larval survival stage of the Life Cycle Model (June to August). Success is strongly correlated with outflow and turbidity and somewhat correlated with Silverside absence and temperature. 

* A TWG member stated that the Performance Analysis model produced different results and thought it might be due to the way food was quantified in the Life Cycle Model. 
  + A TWG member said that the Life Cycle Model food covariate did not include the South Delta during the summer/fall time period when water was the warmest.
  + A TWG member said that if temperatures are high, fish are going to act like there is not a lot of food because they cannot process it.  
  + A TWG member said that a lot of assumptions have to be made about distribution. They do not think it can be quantitatively done with existing data. 
  + A TWG member asked if food was not included in the North Delta because stations were not available. 
  + A TWG member said that stations do not exist in the far North Delta.
* A TWG member asked what cause and effect mechanism on outflow would affect abundance.
  + A TWG member said that outflow is a multivariate index of a lot of habitat conditions that are good for Delta Smelt. They know it is correlated with X2, temperature, and prey abundance. It is important to unpack what those mechanisms are.
  + A TWG member agreed that it is important to unpack the mechanisms. Their model found that there were three low outflow years when fish did well which makes them think about influencing food in the summertime.
  + A TWG member agreed and said that the only reason food was not stated as a correlation on the slide was because it is highly linear with flow.
* A TWG member indicated that most of the food is grown in the North and East Delta and moved into Suisun Bay which causes abundance to look higher because of transport.
  + A TWG member suggested an action of using pulse flows to move water/food out of the South Delta to where the fish actually are.
  + A TWG member said that caution should be warranted if considering pushing hot San Joaquin water into the eastern part of Suisun Bay because it may counteract any benefits of pushing the food there. A lot of the discussion is on what is practical, and all of these are very difficult to do in reality.
  + A TWG member suggested further concerns over flushing selenium and pesticide concentrations. 
  + A TWG member added that there is only State controlled water available for use and that controlling for salinity should be thought about as well.

The project team reviewed the outputs from the juvenile survival stage of the Life Cycle Model (August to November), noting that results are not reliable because of data uncertainties. 

* A TWG member explained that all covariates for this life stage were likely low because the two worst datasets for Delta Smelt are connected for this time period. These results are not very strong.
  + A TWG member said that they picked up the same results in their model and asked if August temperatures are driving the summertime stress.
  + A TWG member said that they are not sure it is anything other than noise as the evidence was weak and suggested bioenergetic loss as a hypothesis.
* A TWG member stated that the results made sense to them. Secchi, temperature, food, and X2 seem to be important in early and mid-summer and mortality goes through the whole summer. Once you get to this time period, you are just seeing the outcomes from previous life stages.

The project team reviewed ways to bin actions and presented the following binning categories:

1. Brainstormed idea 
2. Pre-feasibility stage 
3. Feasibility evaluation stage 
4. Scaled implementation 
5. Mature implementation 

The project team asked the TWG for feedback and tested the process of binning some of the actions. 

* A TWG member suggested a way to clarify which actions would be worthwhile is to consider the amount invested versus the knowledge benefit to the species.
* A TWG member said that there are some actions that can take a long time to implement or reach a level of development where it provides the anticipated benefit. The TWG member was imagining two different timelines for actions: near term and long-term benefits. 
  + A TWG member agreed that near- and long-term benefits should be considered and that actions also have to be bold and urgent. The TWG member suggested choosing a portfolio that include some longer-term actions. 
* A TWG member suggested that actions should be followed with monitoring and assessment and asked if that should be considered. Actions that are not as modifiable should fall into lower number bins.
  + A project team member agreed that the majority of actions should be coupled with a long-term monitoring plan within the adaptive management structure.
* A TWG member liked the overall approach of binning actions. It seems like the framework allows for evaluation of immature ideas that seem practical. 
* A project team member suggested that the TWG would do this binning exercise as group for the long list of actions in the spreadsheet they developed and that some of these actions could be ready to start supporting.
  + A TWG member said that it sounded like a good process.
* A TWG member asked what the difference was between scaled and mature implementation.
  + A project team member said that mature implementation is an action that is implemented, and everyone agrees is working. These actions do include ongoing management in the adaptive management framework. 
* A TWG member suggested that the binning numbers should be relative as there is uncertainty in everything and there is not an action where everything will be known. The TWG member is hoping potential actions that are really good ideas can be persevered even if they are not implementable in the near term.
* A project team member suggested a broader task of cleaning up the spreadsheet to remove overlap between actions. The project team will work with TWG members to do initial binning offline before bringing back to the group. 
  + A TWG member asked about next steps for initial ideas that have yet to be defined and could benefit from brainstorming.
  + A project team member suggested that small working groups could be formed to evaluate actions in the fall after the project team follows up with individual TWG members on certain actions. 

## Next Steps and Work Planning
***

*Upcoming Meetings*

The project team reviewed the remaining meeting in June. Two meetings will also be scheduled for July. 

* Friday, June 26 from 9:00-12:00 p.m.
  + Discuss modeling needs