# Technical Working Group Meeting 9
***
 
**February 10, 2020**
 
## Participants
***
 
### Technical Working Group
* Erin Cole, United States Fish & Wildlife Service (FWS)
* Shawn Acuña, Metropolitan Water District (MWD)
* Randall Mager, California Department of Water Resources (DWR)
* Scott Hamilton, Coalition for a Sustainable Delta
* Bill Bennett, UC Davis, John Muir Institute of the Environment and Center for Watershed Sciences
* Mike Beakes, United States Bureau of Reclamation (USBR)
* Sam Luoma, UC Davis, John Muir Institute of the Environment
* Deanna Sereno, Contra Costa Water District (CCWD)
* Kate Spear, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
* Larry Brown, United States Geological Survey (USGS)

### Project Team
* Mary Beth Day, Kearns & West
* Nora De Cuir, Kearns & West
* Graham Long, Compass Resource Management
* Dan Ohlson, Compass Resource Management
* Bruce DiGennaro, The Essex Partnership
* Mike Urkov, FlowWest
* Anna Constantino, FlowWest

## Action Items
***
* Compass to compile and circulate list of reference that inform the effects pathways diagram with request for feedback from TWG.
* Compass to reframe the objective/goal of the diagram to reflect importance of a self-sustaining population vis-à-vis genetic diversity/hatchery fish.
  + Compass to discuss the implications of these edits with Bruce DiGennaro as it relates to changes to the overall goal statement
* Compass to update objectives and sub objectives to include concept of resiliency and genetic integrity.
* Compass to update management action spreadsheet and distribute to TWG to begin populating
* Project Team to circulate doodle poll for scheduling upcoming meetings 
* Shawn Acuña to send White et al paper on contaminants and silversides
* Erin Cole to look into the question of supplementation and its relationship to this document.
* Scott Hamilton to reach out to Brad Cavallo regarding Feb. 28 presentation

## Key Agreements or Outcomes
***
The TWG proposes the inclusion of language related to achieving a self-sustaining population within the overall goal statement. 
TWG members support general structure of life stage diagrams provided there is a method for including information about interactions/complexities within the diagram that are not currently depicted.

## Introductions
***
The Project Team reviewed the agenda and TWG members introduced themselves.

## Working Group Discussion
***
*Presentation of Effects Pathway Diagrams and Updates*
Compass presented an updated effects pathway diagram for the adult to larvae stage reflecting feedback from the January 24 meeting, as well as diagrams for three additional life stages. The diagram structure will be used to document key references as well as to inform our modeling and analysis approach down the line. Compass highlights the key changes in the adult to larvae diagram. These include shifting the arrow from hatchery production/augmentation to sub-adults – was previously linked to adults, as well as moving contaminants into the central gray box.

*Discussion of Effects Pathways Diagrams and Updates*
The project team asked the TWG for any comments or suggestions on the diagrams. 

* A TWG member noted that they are trying to understand how the diagram reflects life history and how it will all come together at the end. 
* A TWG member agreed, indicating that they have no major suggestions but that the development of management actions may lead to tweaking later. 
* A Compass team member responds that one tool we can use is the bioenergetics model.  The diagrams are structured such that once you move from left right and achieve the objective; the population gets carried forward to the next life stage, where the next diagram picks up. This is similar to how modeling would work across an annual cycle.
* A TWG member indicates support for how methodical the conceptual model is in allowing systematic exploration of each pathway. 
* A TWG member asks if the ovals within the central gray box, such as food and predation, will be allowed to interact with each other. Gives example of foraging ecology – the more you forage, the more energy you use and the greater your risk of predation.
  + A TWG member notes that trying to reflect this kind of interaction could result in a complicated model – don’t want arrows everywhere. 
  + Another TWG member notes that this issue could be a benefit of using multiple models 
  + Compass notes that they will try and find a way to incorporate interactions like this that might not be adequately reflected by the diagram. Can be captured in the write-ups. 
  + Compass notes that this is an example of how multiple analytical approaches may be required to understand the costs and benefits of different management actions. 

Compass moves onto examination of the second stage diagram, larvae to juvenile, noting key differences such as the absence of the hatchery and water temperature as a driver of spawning window and fecundity. Compass asks the TWG for feedback on other areas where there may be differences between the life stage diagrams. 

* A TWG member notes that it might be good to add supplementation to this life-stage diagram.  
  + A TWG member, Erin Cole, agrees and commits that she will look into [current planned supplementation actions] this and get back to the group.
  + A TWG member notes that it makes sense to add supplementation for every stage at this point. 
  + Compass agrees that supplementation can be added at every life stage for now. 

Compass asks the TWG if there are any influences on fecundity that happen at different life stages that might reflect differently from diagram to diagram.

* Compass notes that it has added the word “quality” to the box with the desired outcome – aka “adult abundance and health.” Asks the group if this the correct way to capture this or if there is a better word? 
  + A TWG member suggests that fecundity might be the best word to use, as it is an inherent characteristic of health.
  + Another TWG member suggests that likelihood of survival is better as fecundity is more about a numerical measure of reproduction not quality of individuals.   
  + A third TWG member notes that “quality” was discussed at a previous meeting as a supplement to an abundance measure. 
  + Compass suggests that fecundity be added to the diagrams and as they are fleshed out, the TWG can determine if it makes sense to remain.
  + Compass indicates that it will work on documenting all this feedback and incorporating key documents including MAST and BiOps. Will circulate a list of references.
* A TWG member expresses confusion about actions affecting water temperature as rendered in the diagram, suggesting that there may be influences other than flow and air temperature.
* TWG member notes that there are a number of actions that might affect temperature, however some may not be practical. Explains that coming up with all the potential actions is part of the goal at this stage of the process.
* Compass notes that the process of brainstorming management actions may help us to clarify how we describe things within the diagram. 

Compass asks the TWG if the wording and logic of the objectives and sub-objectives, as show on slide 8, makes sense and follow from the diagrams.

* A TWG member indicates yes, it does make sense. 
* A TWG member asks the group if there are any studies that link contaminants with infertility.
  + A TWG member answers that there is evidence, but it is complicated.
  + A TWG member refers to a population model by White et al that examines the problem in silversides – shows that small change can lead to systematic population loss.
  + A TWG member suggests that contaminants could potentially affect fecundity, fertilization, spawning behavior etc. 
  + A TWG member disagrees, stating that contaminants don’t have a driving effect on the population.
  + Compass notes that these are valuable competing hypothesis that will affect the process of brainstorming management actions. 
* A TWG member asks about the questions at the bottom of slide 8 related to distribution and genetic integrity
  + Compass explains that these are supplemental considerations. Introduces the hypothetical consideration that a smaller number of distributed fish might be more important than a higher number of fish concentrated in one location. 
  + A TWG member agrees that this is a good idea and points out additional consideration associated with distribution, like connectivity.
  + Another TWG member says that distribution is important and agrees that the formulation is important.
  + TWG members discuss the potential for supporting fish populations in various sub-regions by extending the range of suitable habitat. 
  + A TWG member notes that this could be a tricky thing to model.
  + Compass notes that there may be two objectives working in parallel: increasing abundance/health and resiliency. Ideally you want both but we there is a chance they could be in tension.
    - A TWG member asks if distribution should be included as a sub-objective
    - Compass agrees to include consideration of resiliency as a sub objective
  + A TWG member asks if it might make sense to consider variation over time in population and pursue management actions that increase population growth over time.
* Compass notes that the question on slide 8 about genetic integrity relates to the issue of hatcheries and degree to which the goals distinguishes between wild and hatchery fish.
  + A TWG member notes that they are assuming the goal is to increase numbers of wild fish. 
  + A TWG member notes that the hatchery fish and DS are only slightly genetically different and that the hatcheries go to great lengths to maintain genetic diversity.
  + A TWG member notes that genetic diversity is an important component of resiliency.
  + A TWG member suggests that one approach might include hatching out eggs and placing them in the system. 
  + A TWG member agrees that introducing hatchery eggs versus subadults introduces less hatchery behavior while providing enough numbers for adults to find each other and spawn.  Suggest limiting to eggs or larvae.
  + A TWG member agrees that this could be a goal with assumption that once wild fish are able to spawn in the wild again, the number of hatchery eggs would be reduced. 
    - Compass notes that in this case, the ideas is that the hatchery would only be a tool to help achieve a self-sustaining wild population.  
    - Several TWG members agree that the hatchery is a temporary strategy.
    - Compass agrees to reframe objectives to reflect the discussion about genetic integrity and resiliency.

*Discussion of Approach to Brainstorming Candidate Actions*
The Compass Team introduces the relationship between the diagrams and management actions. Asks the TWG to brainstorm actions including those that may already exist or new actions that should be evaluated. The spreadsheet will serve as the repository for these actions.

* A TWG member notes that they like this approach and express a desire for a group brainstorm in addition to gathering individual feedback.
* Compass confirms that that is the plan: individuals put down ideas and then come back together and workshop as a group. 
* Compass notes that spreadsheet is broken up by life stage; as such there may be overlap between actions. TWG members can use shorthand “see X” to refer to other sections with identical actions. Encourages TWG members not to feel inhibited by feasibility of actions at this point, as part of the goal is to identify research priorities. 
  + Compass asks the TWG if there are any other documents like this that attempt to capture the universe of potential management actions.
* TWG member asks if it is OK to solicit feedback beyond the TWG.
  + Compass agrees that it is a good idea to solicit feedback from other networks and that these networks can participate in the brainstorming session as desired. 
* Compass will make final updates to the spreadsheet and send around to TWG to begin populating. Will check-in on how the process is going at the next meeting. 

## Next Steps and Work Planning
***

* The Project Team confirms that Matt Nobriga has confirmed availability for February 28 to talk about predation. 
  + A TWG member indicates that it might be good to invite Brad Cavallo to present on the same day about Silverside predation. Other TWG members agree. 
  + Scott will reach out to Brad re. Feb 28 mtg.
* Project team notes that some members will be absent for March 13 full day meeting and ask if it makes sense to defer, focus instead on discussing management actions and other topics?
  + TWG members agree.
* Project Team to do a doodle poll for April, May and June mtgs. 

*Upcoming Meetings*

* The next meeting will be February 28 from 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. – predation presentation
* Friday, March 13: half-day meeting – topics tbd
* Friday, March 27: 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. – habitat presentation