# Technical Working Group Meeting 10
***
 
**February 28, 2020**
 
## Participants
***
 
### Technical Working Group
* Erin Cole, United States Fish & Wildlife Service (FWS)
* Shawn Acuña, Metropolitan Water District (MWD)
* Randall Mager, California Department of Water Resources (DWR)
* Scott Hamilton, Coalition for a Sustainable Delta
* Bill Bennett, UC Davis, John Muir Institute of the Environment and Center for Watershed Sciences
* Mike Beakes, United States Bureau of Reclamation (USBR)
* Deanna Sereno, Contra Costa Water District (CCWD)
* Kate Spear, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
* Larry Brown, United States Geological Survey (USGS)
* Will Smith, United States Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS)
* Ben Geske, Delta Science Program (DSP)
* Brycen Swart, CA Department of Fish and Wildlife (CDFW)
* Lauren Damon, Interagency Ecological Program (IEP)
* Brian Schreier, Department of Water Resources (DWR)

### Project Team
* Mary Beth Day, Kearns & West
* Nora De Cuir, Kearns & West
* Graham Long, Compass Resource Management
* Dan Ohlson, Compass Resource Management
* Mike Urkov, FlowWest
* Bruce DiGennaro, The Essex Partnership

## Action Items
***
* TWG members to add actions to candidate management actions spreadsheet per assignments by March 20.
* Compass to organize spreadsheet for review at March 27 meeting. 
* Project Team to add Monday, April 20 to the doodle poll for a full day meeting and recirculate to TWG.
* Project Team to reach out to Richard Connon for March 13 presentation on contaminants.
* Larry to provide Compass with contact information for Shruti Khanna.
* Brian to put Compass in touch with Brittany Davis.

## Key Agreements or Outcomes
***
The TWG agrees to a comprehensive approach to filling out the candidate management spreadsheet and divides up topics by individual to facilitate the first round of entries. 

## Introductions
***
The Project Team reviewed the agenda and TWG members introduced themselves.

## Working Group Discussion
***
*Presentation: Matt Nobriga – Predation*
In summary, Matt has drawn the conclusion that there has been little quantitative exploration of Delta Smelt predation and little quantitative understanding. Complex models can only superficially address the complexity of the food web and specifically, he is not sure how useful models are for predation. To be consistent with the current state of science, the SDM process should reflect the possibility of high importance, low importance and extreme uncertainty. 

* What is known, scientifically:
  + Delta Smelt are forage fish. They have no spines, and are not toxic. They live in open water and have been found in the digestive tracts of a numerous predators. 
  + Non-native predators, such as the striped bass, have the largest potential impact. See Nobriga et al 2013; Nobriga and Smith, in press; Moyle and Bennett counterpoint.
  + According to Bennett, 2005, mortality rate declines with age and size, like all fish. They are less frail as they get bigger, with fewer predators able to catch them. Eggs and larvae have a diverse range of predators, however once they are fish, they have more astute predators like largemouth fishes.
  + Delta Smelt monitoring program – Interagency Ecological Program (IEP). This came from striped bass monitoring and research originally. The first striped bass model was from 1972 and related to river flow and a bottom-up/top-down production model, wherein top-down was cannibalism. When river flows were low and turbidity less, cannibalism increased. 
  + Delta Smelt monitoring stems from that program, utilizing the style and framework of the striped bass surveys, which emphasize distribution, status and trend.
  + In the 1990’s Bennett and Moyle’s conceptual model concluded that what is good for striped bass is good for Delta Smelt and vice-versa. They spawn around the same time, rear in the same places and respond similarly to hydrology, though this may no longer be the case. 
* After many years of monitoring, we see numerous patterns and ways to interpret them, as well as many explanations, including things like sample bias. See figure from Nobriga and Smith, 2020. All of these are probably going on to some degree. The most useful for this group are likely the following:
  + Foraging Arena Theory per Ahrens et al 2012, which states that fish live in blocks of habitat. They have to acquire food, then shelter or hide to complete their life cycle. There is a tension between getting enough food to reach sexual maturity and the risk of predation. 
    - Not sure how these arenas might work for Delta Smelt. They might use shallow water for cover and seem to use turbidity for cover. They seem not to like structure based on lab observations as they don’t like having things around them.
    - Regarding foraging arena, they practice gaming in open water. When do they school tightly and when do they go to shallow waters – these questions are hard to quantify. 
  + Regarding risk factors for foraging arena, we can think about management actions in the SDM process. 
    - Turbidity – Delta Smelt like turbid water in both the lab and field; they don’t like clear water. This makes sense for open water forage fish in an estuary as open water predators tend to be visual.
    - Temperature – The Bay Delta is fairly warm for fish like the Delta Smelt. This increases the number of calories they need to complete their life cycle. Moving around to forage means taking risks. As such, higher temps = more risk. 
    - Zooplankton density – when there is lower density, Delta Smelt have to move around more, thereby incurring greater risk. 
    - Submerged aquatic weeds/vegetation (SAV) – Delta Smelt don’t like structure. When put in a tank with SAV, they stayed away even when there was no predator in the tank. Cultural facilities keep them in black tanks in the dark. They don’t want to add turbidity because it clogs the equipment. 

*Open Discussion*

* Some ask, why don’t we just remove predators like large mouthed bass? Pine et al shows that multi-species food webs are nonlinear and context dependent. Assuming there will be more Delta Smelt with less striped bass is not advisable. 
  + A TWG member notes that modeling on the Columbia looked at Northern Pike minnow predation on salmon. When you crop off the largest adults, you get more juvenile fish in the size range that will eat salmon. Here, if we tried to manipulate the size distribution of striped bass, that could make things worse, not better. Erik Loboschefsky’s modeling addresses that. 
  + A TWG member notes that Loboschefsky found that juvenile striped bass has consumption comparable to adults.
  + A TWG member asks how turbidity, temperature, SAV and other elements, for which we don’t have great information, should be accounted for in the models. 
  + A member asks if there are any good spatial maps. 
  + A TWG member responds he doesn’t believe there are metrics of any kind other than for discrete periods of time. For example, we don’t much data on SAV. We have some, but not enough to populate the model.
  + Matt responds that indeed there may not be adequate data. One could conduct SAV edge calculations with the data we have. Could estimate the benefit of a restoration strategy that reduces edges and look at the density of Delta Smelt where SAV doesn’t exist and the density where it does. For instance Sherman Lake, which used to be open with turbidity. Now it is encroached and you might be able to quantify a benefit. This won’t work everywhere.
  + A TWG member notes that Shruti Khanna might be a person to talk about this with. Most data is from flyovers from the Central and Northern Delta and the data is patchy, though you might be able to make an estimate or guess.
  + A TWG member asks if it would be worth it to make that guess, or whether the TWG should focus on other areas excluding SAV.
  + Matt indicates that this may be a benefit of the SDM process – that you do what you can with what you have. It will become evident if it is a high priority. 
  + The Project Team asks who to follow up with:
    - A TWG member indicates Shruti Khanna from CDFW, per a recently published paper.  Larry will send contact info to the Project Team.
* A TWG member notes that per Matt’s 2014 paper, it appears that he sees no correlation between striped bass abundance and Delta Smelt. It looked like there were two possible reasons: there wasn’t enough overlap between the two species or because Delta Smelt are such a rare prey. In other words, if they come across enough Delta Smelt they will harvest them but they won’t look for them. If Delta Smelt are very abundant, striped bass will shave off the top but still there is not a correlation. Is that correct?
  + Matt indicates yes, with the following caveats: striped bass biomass is much greater than Delta Smelt and therefore they could very quickly make a big impact on Delta Smelt numbers, if they took the opportunity. 
  + A TWG member states that striped bass are quintessential opportunistic feeders. Will eat them if they come across them but ideally they want something higher density with higher energy.  
  + Another TWG member notes that they will go for the easiest prey that gives them the highest nutrition. States that there is evidence for that across the US but not in the Delta
  + Matt indicates that there is evidence of prey switching amongst striped bass in the Delta that they switch opportunistically and very fast. 
  + A TWG member clarifies that he was referring to prey selection, when given two at the same time, as opposed to switching.
  + Matt indicates that he is not familiar with any research in that regard. 
  + A TWG member asks if the striped bass most interested in Delta Smelt are the small ones, and if so, how many there are in that size category.  
  + A TWG member notes that Erik Loboschefsky had made some guesses based on bioenergetics. 
  + A TWG member notes that striped bass move from the Bay to the river very quickly, so even with a gross population estimate, you don’t know where they are. 
  + A TWG member re-iterates that the feeding of striped bass on Delta Smelt is highly stochastic and hard to put in a deterministic arrangement. 
  + A TWG member asks if striped bass predation should be considered intermittently important, like entrainment.
  + Another TWG member indicates that this might be a strong statement, and that entrainment is a different thing. Predation would be encompassed in mortality and is a hard thing to measure. 
  + A TWG member asks if it might be better to categorize predation by striped bass as rarely important.
  + Matt notes that if it wasn’t water temperature or zooplankton that killed them, then it is possible that it was foraging risk.
  + A TWG member agrees, stating that as temperature increases, it impacts the ability of Delta Smelt to make the right decisions. 
  + A TWG member asks if the important question to ask is what is causing them to be preyed on more so than the nature of the actual predation.
  + Matt indicates that the data related to foraging arena is better than the predation data. 
  + Compass asks if it makes more sense to focus on underlying causes of predation, as it relates to management actions, rather than direct predator management actions. 
  + A TWG member agrees that the idea is to model predation risks rather than predation rate. 
  + A TWG member responds that there might also be value to understanding the effect size of predation control and predation rate. That the actual predation rate isn’t really the thing to focus on – might need to test that to support the hypothesis.
  + Matt indicates that his 2013 paper focused on predation rate, which was somewhere between zero and high. Because it is so low at absolute value, uncertainty is constrainable. 
  + A TWG member notes that this is similar to the discussion about contaminants. We don’t know how many fish die from contaminants but we know that they are having an effect because of health metrics. The levels of uncertainty are similar. 

*Presentation: Steven Zeug – Potential Predation on Delta Smelt Early Life Stages by Inland Silversides*

* Steve lays out the goals of his work: 1) to understand the magnitude of the effect of inland silversides (ISS) on Delta Smelt early life stages; and 2) to evaluate potential for using this data in population models; and 3) identify data gaps to improve these estimates. 
* The strategy is 1) estimate abundance of inland silverside (ISS) and Delta Smelt at relevant life stages in space and time; 2) identify where there is co-occurrence; 3) estimate pre cap number of Delta Smelt that could be consumed by ISS; 4) using those data, establish a proportion of Delta Smelt that could be consumed based on abundance of ISS in that area. 
* He utilized the same method as Polanksy et al, 2019, to develop abundance estimates by region, year and month. For Delta Smelt, he used 20mm survey data, which most consistently represents the Delta Smelt of a size that could be consumed by adult ISS. We looked at larval net surveys, but they were not as good. We are open to suggestions. For ISS, they used the Spring Kodiak Trawl (SKT) as ISS is a more littoral species. The SKT would represent ISS within the space of potential interaction with Delta Smelt larvae in the pelagic zone and would capture ISS large enough to consume Delta Smelt within the 20 mm survey. 
* To estimate consumption potential, they used B. Schreier et al, 2016 data. This showed Delta Smelt in the guts of 69 out of 559 ISS inspected, for an occurrence frequency of .1234.
* To determine potential consumption, he utilized two equations: Number of smelt consumed in region i for month j – see presentation – as well as proportion of Delta Smelt consumed in region i for month j. 
* In terms of results, they only have data from March, April and May, as these are the only months when the SKT overlaps with the 20mm survey. We don’t think this is a problem because we see a general trend within years including abundance in 20 mm survey. The problem is larval townets, where you can get one hit and never see anything again. 
* ISS abundance declines between March and May.
* When looking at the MSS annual pattern, per Mahardja et al, 2016, the need to cut off in May is reasonable. Mahardja data also showed declining ISS from March to May. Small fish are unlikely to pretty on Delta Smelt from 20 mm survey.
* When looking at abundance by region for Delta Smelt in the 20 mm survey, it’s what you’d expect: higher numbers in Cache Slough, Suisun and the confluence. 
* For ISS by region the numbers are higher in Cache Slough, Suisun, near Stockton and near the Mokelumne River.
* The proportional consumption is strongly bimodal. Most of the time the probability of consumption is zero. That is everything that is present and some in between the extremes, across the entire estuary.
* Proportional consumption by month is higher in March and then declines, which makes sense because that is also when the highest abundance of ISS is. 
* The trend among years is strongly bimodal; there is no modeling here but we didn’t notice any trends. 
* Regarding trends among regions, in Cache Slough and Suisun Marsh, it is rare for zero proportional consumption. There is frequently potential for 100 and lots of intermediate values. Of the locations with the most ISS in the pelagic zone, these two are where there are some dynamics to consumption. 
* The main points are: 
  + A strongly bimodal distribution of proportion consumed
  + Consistent potential for interactions in the Cache Slough Complex and Suisun Marsh
  + Evidence of greater potential effects in March; declining in April and May
  + No strong pattern among years
  + Temporal mismatch in ISS and Delta Smelt abundance within years
* Next steps include: 1) addressing assumptions about functional response type; 2) assigning distribution to magnitude of consumption when DNA is detected; and 3) integrating abundance of ISS into effects on Delta Smelt with time lags. 
* Wish list includes: 1) detection of Delta Smelt DNA in ISS by region/month; 2) diet of ISS by region and electivity’s and 3) samples of Delta Smelt and ISS close in time.

*Open Discussion*

* A TWG member asks whether Steve has any idea as to whether ISS is a significant predator in the two regions identified by the research – Cache Slough and Suisun Marsh – and whether they are consuming a big or small percent of the population.
  + Steve replies that the values are all over the place for Cache Slough. ISS could consume 100% of Delta Smelt estimated to be there, but occasionally 0%. It is highly variable and less bimodal than other regions except Suisun Marsh.
  + A TWG member asks if his interpretation of the date is correct that in a third to a half of years, ISS are decimating Delta Smelt in those areas.
o	Steve affirms that they potentially are, but the data doesn’t say that they actually are. 
* A TWG member notes that there is no 20 mm survey at Liberty Island, instead, probably at Deepwater Ship Channel.
* A TWG member notes that the mouth of ISS aren’t that big and as such, they probably aren’t consuming prey one quarter their size. You may want to consider a different length cut off. Also, in my experience, turbidity isn’t required to catch ISS, however, it appears that you are seeing this with the Kodiak catches. 
  + Steve agrees to look at these issues more closely.
* A TWG member notes that Delta Smelt lay their eggs in the littoral zone, where ISS are abundant. The Delta Smelt hatch and the yolk sac larvae come up into a school of ISS and get wiped out which is why this is stochastic in time and space and give you probabilities of 0 and 1. 
* Steve agrees, noting that Delta Smelt are more susceptible to ISS at the smallest sizes. This could be useful for restoration – looking at areas where ISS don’t really show up and attracting Delta Smelt there. 
* A TWG member notes that is has been difficult to figure out where Delta Smelt spawn. This would be a great research opportunity, which could then be scaled up.
* A TWG member asks if there are theories as to why certain months are low with regard to the proportional consumption slide.
  + Steve responds that the gradient, which probably has to do with stochasticity, might be something useful to model. But it depends on phenology of when Delta Smelt are spawning and hatching versus what ISS are doing. ISS are probably not inhabiting the pelagic, rather in marshes adjacent to Montezuma Slough and Liberty Island where there is lots of good littoral habitat. In big recruitment years, they might get pushed into the pelagic. 
  + A TWG member notes that those areas are fairly confined so we are more likely to see co-occurrence. 
  + Another TWG member notes that turbidity provides ISS cover just like Delta Smelt. 
* A TWG member asks if Steve has broken down the calculation. If the calculation is constant, is the spread in data points really representing Delta Smelt catch density or truly an interaction? The member notes that in their 2013 paper, things that happened, like temperature, mattered and needed to be built into the predation model. The density of Delta Smelt matters but if you try to plot any one factor in a model against the result, you won’t find correlation. Is the estimate of consumption here driven by one factor?
  + Steve explains that he hasn’t investigated that exactly, as it is recent work, but that he should. When looking at abundance of Delta Smelt by region versus abundance of ISS, it’s not clear that they would be co-occurring. Delta Smelt seem to have a more spatially even distribution versus ISS. 
* Compass asks if we determine that ISS are a limiting factor or problem, might that make them something to consider for a management action? Or is this similar to forage, temperature and habitat. 
  + The group responds generally that they can’t think of one. 
  + Steve notes that an ISS potential to consume of 12x the number of Delta Smelt can be used to set expectations. 
  + A TWG member notes that anything that includes turbidity would benefit reduced predation across the board as seen with ISS predation on larval smelt. Notes that his 2016 paper showed that turbidity was the only real habitat predictor of incidence of predation. The feasibility of changing the turbidity of the Delta is another question but our research indicates it would be an efficient management tool. 
  + A TWG member asks if that study included analysis of aquatic vegetation. Answer is no, due to relatively high turbidity which made visual assessment difficult and didn’t have time to do rake samples. 
  + A TWG member notes that perhaps a management action could focus on habitat selection difference between Delta Smelt and ISS. As more habitat is developed, perhaps we make it attractive to Delta Smelt and not ISS. As it relates to the hatchery program, when putting eggs back into the system, it seems there are certain areas that might be more successful than others. 
  + Steve notes that he welcomes any suggestions that the TWG may have.

*Candidate Management Action Spreadsheet*
Compass provides a review of the candidate management action spreadsheet, noting that there are no major changes since the last meeting. Numbers (e.g. A06) have been added, corresponding to various nodes, and placeholder rows have been inserted. The expectation is for TWG members to replace the simple statements that are included now with actual management actions, and then to move through the spreadsheet to describe the actions. Compass notes that the column related to conditions that would or would not trigger a potential action is particularly important to fill out. 

Compass also noted that the diagram has been cleaned up since the last meeting and nodes have been linked to the spreadsheet to facilitate moving back and forth. Asks the group how they might like to begin the process.

* A TWG member asks if it includes any actions detailed from previous efforts.
* A TWG member notes that some actions will be very specific with regard to where and when they will work. Some will have contingencies. Perhaps start with the Resiliency Strategy?
* Compass asks if a particular TWG member could be assigned to provide strategies related to the Resiliency Strategy and BiOps, as a way of eliminating overlap.
* A TWG member agrees that the goal is to think out of the box, but also to avoid redundancy; not sure which is the priority.
* Compass asks if it would help for them to make the first effort regarding actions for the Resiliency Strategy and BiOps. Notes that they would likely not get all details exactly right so would need to be reviewed. 
* A TWG member suggests that one person could take on a class of actions and fill in that part of the spreadsheet and then share with others for review.
* A TWG member notes that it could be approached by one person taking a topic, describing a group of actions, and then thinking about which life stages they apply to. This would result in more of a narrative form which isn’t exactly how the sheet is set up.
* A TWG member asks if the group should spend time fleshing out actions that are already included in other management documents. Suggests instead a focus on populating the spreadsheet with new ideas.
* FlowWest notes that they are hoping some of the actions will have synergistic properties or that we might end up with combinations of actions.
* A TWG member notes that we don’t want to run the risk of missing the CSAMP’s scope of work for this effort. Agrees that we don’t want to be redundant, but also want to look at the whole realm of possibility. 
* Compass notes that there may be alternatives to things being done currently and that it is probably useful to have a comprehensive list of actions including details as to where, when and why. 
* Compass suggests that TWG members try to use the spreadsheet as it is, but if it doesn’t work, to just write down ideas and send them to Compass. 
* A TWG member notes that they should be able to use the spreadsheet, but that it compartmentalizes thinking a bit. 
* Other TWG members note that the process seems like it makes sense and is feasible. 
* Compass asks the TWG members if they are willing to identify particular topics to take on.
  + Larry offers to do turbidity and water temperature
  + Shawn agrees to take contaminants
  + Bill offers to take on food 
  + Erin to take on salinity – notes that she may need to talk with Compass offline to ensure she understands the assignment.
    - FlowWest notes that it might be useful to look at what was done in rapid prototyping effort; the range of CalSim runs. This includes discussion of turbidity and how it could or could not ultimately feed into the model. Contaminants are covered as well. She could start with the report by Peterson. 
  + Lauren to take on adult/larvae. Notes that she might need assistance with contaminants but can do the bulk of that transition. 
  + Will agrees to take on entrainment. 
  + Mike B. will assist with entrainment and BiOps, which, he notes, will touch on a lot of different life stages. 
  + Compass agrees to assist with getting the BiOps component into the right format and to take a stab at the Resiliency Strategy. 
    - A TWG member notes that Compass should reach out to Brittany Davis regarding the Resiliency Strategy.
    - Brian offers to put Compass in touch with Brittany. 
* Compass asks about timeline for the first round of inputs to the spreadsheet and TWG members agree that they need until the end of March.
  + The Project Team notes that there is a meeting scheduled for March 27 – this can serve as a first deadline.
    - Compass indicates that if folks get their actions inputted by 3/20, then Compass can compile in advance of the meeting. Realistically, the spreadsheet won’t be complete but at least we’ll have a sense for what’s been done.
* Compass notes that it’s hoping that anyone and everyone will take stab at entering some actions and sending them along. Also notes that Compass remains open to feedback about how the spreadsheet is organized and if the logic isn’t working.

## Next Steps and Work Planning
***

* The Project Team notes that the dates in the most recent doodle are looking good but need more folks to respond. 
* The Project Team asks about topics for the next meetings. Will it still work for Larry and Scott to present on March 27? Topics would include habitat, temperature etc. The remainder of the agenda would be reviewing the status of the management action spreadsheet. 
  + Larry and Scott agree to present on March 27.
* The Project Team notes that there is no plan for March 13, but will reach out to Richard Connon for a presentation on contaminants. Shawn will share his contact details. The second half of that meeting will focus on candidate actions and any related questions.
  + There is still a question as to the full day session in April – still don’t have feedback from the whole TWG yet.  
    - Deanna notes that she has conflicts on April 22-24 so she couldn’t fill out the poll. However, Monday of that week would work.
    - Larry indicates that most April dates will work, however will be unavailable due to travel the last week of May and all of June. 
    - Project Team agrees to add April 20 to the doodle and recirculate. 

*Upcoming Meetings*

* Friday, March 13: 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. – Contaminants, Richard Connon? 
* Friday, March 27: 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. – Habitat presentation, Larry and Scott
* April, tbd