# Technical Working Group Meeting 17
***
 
**May 26, 2020**
 
## Participants
***
 
### Technical Working Group
* Shawn Acuña, Metropolitan Water District (MWD)
* Larry Brown, United States Geological Survey (USGS)
* Erin Cole, United States Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS)
* Scott Hamilton, Coalition for a Sustainable Delta
* Randall Mager, California Department of Water Resources (DWR)
* Will Smith, United States Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS)
* Sam Luoma, UC Davis, John Muir Institute of the Environment
* Deanna Sereno, Contra Costa Water District (CCWD)
* Mike Beakes, United States Bureau of Reclamation (USBR)
* Lauren Damon, Interagency Ecological Program (IEP)
* Kate Spear, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)

### Project Team
* Nora De Cuir, Kearns & West 
* Alyson Scurlock, Kearns & West 
* Graham Long, Compass Resource Management
* Dan Ohlson, Compass Resource Management
* Bruce DiGennaro, The Essex Partnership
* Mike Urkov, FlowWest

### Guest Presenter
* Dennis Murphy, University of Nevada, Reno (UNR)

### Guest Observer
* Brycen Swart, California Department of Fish and Wildlife (CDFW)

## Action Items
***
* Facilitation team to begin process of distributing batches of summaries to TWG in advance of web posting. Summaries will feature caveat that they are facilitator notes, not approved or reviewed by TWG, per direction from CAMT. The team will ask for any comments on accuracy of notes and will recirculate any comments or changes made that were not shared directly with group, prior to posting. 
* TWG members to reach out to Scott and Dennis with any follow up questions by phone, email or during the next TWG meeting on Friday, May 29. 
* Shawn to keep in touch with Dan about the Maunder & Deriso Model.

## Key Agreements or Outcomes
***
TWG members agreed that they have well established conceptual models and that the affinity analysis should be pursued with caution as it is a univariate analysis. TWG members supported having a broader discussion in future meetings on the roles of specific models and analyses moving forward. 

## Introductions
***
The project team reviewed the agenda and attendance roster for TWG members.

## Working Group Discussion – Documentation Updates
***
The project team discussed the new protocol for posting TWG meeting summaries on a website (to be developed by FlowWest) for transparency. Meeting summaries will be paired down and posted with the caveat that they are facilitator notes and have not been reviewed or approved by meeting participants to reduce the workload of the TWG and facilitation team. All TWG members will have the opportunity to review the notes for factual accuracy and notes will be sent out in batches for a rolling review.

* A TWG member asked if the summary review process would include circulating any edits made by TWG member to the group.
  + The project team noted that any changes will be distributed to the larger TWG to make sure everyone is aware of changes.

## Working Group Discussion – Affinity Analysis
***

*Presentation on Listening to the Fish*

Scott Hamilton (Coalition for a Sustainable Delta) and Dennis Murphy (UNR) gave an overview of how the affinity analysis framework can be used to provide inference on habitat requirements and to identify thresholds and targets for habitat restoration. By providing guidance on Delta Smelt habitat requirements by life stage, the affinity analysis framework can help identify which conditions are inadequate and which conditions should be prioritized for restoration activities. A draft manuscript and supplemental material to the presentation were distributed to TWG members.

*Discussion on Affinity Analysis*

The group discussed Scott and Dennis’ presentation entitled Listening to the Fish.
 
* A TWG member asked how the affinity analysis could inform the SDM process.
  + Scott said the affinity analysis provides a different way of looking at how effective some of the actions might be. 
  + Dennis referenced the Delta Smelt resiliency strategy and said the affinity analysis gives an idea of the likelihood of the actions on the list bringing benefits in a quantitative context. Currency can be put on actions to determine the range of benefits that would result from different investments.
* A TWG member asked correlation vs. causation in the analysis, since there is the danger of them being confused and resulting in wrong conclusions about cause and effect. 
  + Scott shared an example of Delta Smelt liking salinity and noted that the data that supports that assumption is noisy and should be taken with caution. He suggested the affinity analysis could support the SDM process by helping to refine which management actions are taken and could provide initial targets for adaptive management that could be reevaluated over time.  
  + A TWG member said a strong correlation only means a higher fit to occurrence. The affinity analysis is based upon statistical correlation, so caution should be taken. The alternative is a solid conceptual model, whether or not it is quantitative, which the TWG has already established.   
  + Scott said he agreed there are well established conceptual models. He shared that all of the affinity analysis was done from univariate analysis, which can be dangerous because they can get the wrong answers. In Scott and Dennis’ analysis, they eliminated data when there were conditions with covariates in uninhabitable ranges. Conceptual models do not tell you what target should be reached.
  + Dennis suggested the full extent of the paper they have written is missing in this discussion. The affinity analysis helps avoid carrying out activities in areas where they are likely to be ineffective; it does not tell you what to do and where. It can be used as a guide toward management actions that will be implemented into an adaptive framework that work towards providing positive outcomes for Delta Smelt.
* A TWG member suggested that the core issue is that the affinity analysis focuses on habitat as a variable whereas the conceptual models and Bioenergetics Model focus on population abundancy. There are two different analytical approaches and the TWG needs to decide what the SDM process should be structured around.
  + Scott said the value of the affinity analysis is to have a systematic way for defining the management actions and how they will be evaluated. He will present on performance evaluation at the next meeting.  
* A guest observer noted that this could be a unique opportunity to exercise two different models geared towards the same end goal to enable more support for the management routes taken. 
  + A project team member asked the TWG what role the affinity analysis should play moving forward. The affinity analysis helps identify where certain actions might be more helpful spatially. 
  + A project team member said that there should be a broader discussion of all of the models discussed. It is known that some actions will be conditional, and this type of analysis might help derive conditions under certain management actions that should or should not be taken. 
  + A TWG member agreed that the affinity analysis seems like a useful tool for going through the assessment of actions, but that they would like to read the supplemental material that was circulated in more detail. The TWG member agreed with the notion to proceed with caution as it is a univariate analysis on multiple variables rather than seeing how things interact.
  + Scott stated that anyone could reach out to him and Dennis with any thoughts or questions. Their paper is still in draft form.

## Next Steps and Work Planning
***

*Upcoming Meetings*

The project team reviewed the upcoming meeting schedule. 

* The next meeting is on Friday, May 29 and will focus on Scott’s performance analysis and Will’s presentation on the Life Cycle Model. 
* Meeting 19 is on Friday, June 5 and will be a presentation on entrainment by Lenny Grimaldo (ICF). Josh Korman (Ecometric) will be joining as well.  
  + Shawn will keep in contact with the project team about presenting on the Maunder & Deriso Model during this meeting.
* Meeting 20 will be on Friday, June 19 and can focus on a synthesis of all the models and analyses discussed up to this point.
  + Modeling needs for hydrology and hydrodynamics need to start being discussed.
* The project team hopes to have drafts of the effects pathways documentation before TWG meetings pause over summer.