# Technical Working Group Meeting 23
***
 
**September 25, 2020**
 
## Participants
***

### Technical Working Group
* Shawn Acuña, Metropolitan Water District (MWD)
* Mike Beakes, United States Bureau of Reclamation (USBR)
* Bill Bennett, UC Davis, John Muir Institute of the Environment and Center for Watershed Sciences
* Erin Cole, United States Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS)
* Lauren Damon, Interagency Ecological Program (IEP)
* Scott Hamilton, Coalition for a Sustainable Delta
* Sam Luoma, UC Davis, John Muir Institute of the Environment
* Randall Mager, California Department of Water Resources (DWR)
* Will Smith, United States Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS)

### Project Team
* Mary Beth Day, Kearns & West
* Alyson Scurlock, Kearns & West 
* Graham Long, Compass Resource Management
* Dan Ohlson, Compass Resource Management
* Mike Urkov, FlowWest
* Bruce DiGennaro, The Essex Partnership

### Guest Observers 
* Brycen Swart, California Department of Fish and Wildlife (CDFW)
* Rosemary Hartman, California Department of Water Resources (DWR)

## Action Items
***
* Compass to share Draft Phase 2 Report and online supporting documentation by 9/30 for TWG review.
* TWG members to complete the Doodle Poll to help schedule the Phase 2 Review & Phase 3 Kickoff Meeting by COB Friday 10/2.

## Key Agreements or Outcomes

***

TWG members agreed that the online documentation needs to have a clear process for submitting, reviewing, and incorporating new information (including version control tracking). TWG members supported the process for reviewing the draft materials.

## Introductions

***

The project team reviewed the agenda, meeting guidelines, and attendance roster for TWG members.

## Working Group Discussion

***

The project team reviewed the Draft Phase 2 Report and online supporting documentation that outlines the effects pathways and management actions and asked the TWG for feedback.

* A TWG member asked if the TWG should review all the online documentation or if they should focus on reviewing the areas they know most about. 
  + The project team said that it would be good for TWG members to review the areas they are most familiar with to make sure the content is represented adequately. 
* A TWG member thanked the project team and TWG members for their efforts and said that the online documentation looks like an excellent resource. The TWG member noted that is important to define a clear process for submitting, reviewing, and incorporating new information into the living resource. 
  + A TWG member agreed that there needs to be a way to keep track of different versions or a way to provide a date stamp for revisions.
  + The project team said that the Wiki platform tracks every change. It may be possible to have discussion pages lie beneath each page to debate the wording and background pages for the technical areas that are still being reviewed.
  + A TWG member agreed that version control is important. The TWG member believes that others will be excited about this platform and are going to want to know how to contribute to it. There needs to be a clear path for reviewing and vetting material so there is limited confusion.
* The project team said that they are excited about the opportunity to create this living documentation. The project team encouraged TWG members to keep in mind that they are aiming for a collective understanding of the synthesis information specifically to evaluate management actions of different pathways and to understand and agree what the limiting pathways may be. 
  + A TWG member asked if the project team wanted TWG members to only flag areas that they thought were incomplete in this round of review rather than adding detailed information. 
  + The project team suggested that TWG members could flag areas that need further development for now and the group could discuss at a later time. 

## Next Steps and Work Planning for Phase 3
***
The project team reviewed the Phase 3 workplan with TWG members and suggested that the TWG would aim to meet monthly over the next 12 months. 

* The project team will circulate the Draft Phase 2 Report and online supporting documentation for TWG review.
* The next TWG meeting will be at the end of October and will focus on reviewing the TWG’s feedback on the report and kicking off Phase 3.
  + The project team will send out a Doodle Poll for the October meeting.