# Technical Working Group Meeting 13
***
 
**April 8, 2020**
 
## Participants
***
 
### Technical Working Group
* Shawn Acuña, Metropolitan Water District (MWD)
* Bill Bennett, UC Davis, John Muir Institute of the Environment and Center for Watershed Sciences 
* Larry Brown, United States Geological Survey (USGS)
* Erin Cole, United States Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS)
* Lauren Damon, Interagency Ecological Program (IEP)
* Scott Hamilton, Coalition for a Sustainable Delta
* Sam Luoma, UC Davis, John Muir Institute of the Environment
* Randall Mager, California Department of Water Resources (DWR)
* Will Smith, United States Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS)
* Ted Sommer, California Department of Water Resources (DWR)

### Project Team
* Mary Beth Day, Kearns & West
* Sara Omar, Kearns & West 
* Graham Long, Compass Resource Management
* Dan Olson, Compass Resource Management
* Bruce DiGennaro, The Essex Partnership

### Guest Observers
* Dennis Murphy, University of Nevada, Reno
* Rosemary Hartman, California Department of Water Resources (DWR)

## Action Items
***
* TWG members to continue developing candidate management actions. 
  + Will and Erin to update entrainment actions document.
  + Bill to work on food actions.
  + Specificity is encouraged!
* Compass to continue compiling candidate management actions.
  + Compass to coordinate with Shawn and Sam on contaminants actions.
  + Compass to coordinate with Rosemary on potential actions.
  + Compass to coordinate with Mike Urkov on potential actions from Peterson effort.
* Compass to update topic-specific sources in Key Reference document.
* TWG members to share suggestions for additional supplementation speakers with Dan and Mary Beth.
* The Project Team to coordinate with potential entrainment speakers.
  + Erin to follow up with Gonzalo Castillo.
* The Project Team to confirm remaining meeting dates for May and June and send out calendar invitations.

## Key Agreements or Outcomes
***
* N/A

## Introductions
***
The Project Team reviewed the agenda and noted two specific meeting objectives:

* Review and discuss transient habitat, water temperature, and turbidity-related information and hypotheses. 
* Check-in on progress brainstorming candidate management actions.

## Working Group Discussion
***
*Presentation: Larry Brown – Transient Habitat and Water Temperature*

Larry began by emphasizing the importance of understanding temperature. He reviewed how temperature varies in each life stage, as well as corresponding thermal tolerances. 

Larry noted that tidal flows are much larger than net flows during the low flow season resulting in a long residence time. Air temperature is currently the greatest driver of water temperature and largely determines why fish stay in specific locations. 

During summer days, air gets hot and less dense inland, while cool breezes come in from the coast during the afternoons. This can cause a rapid change in temperature (i.e. temperature can go down six degrees Fahrenheit in three hours) and generate a temperature gradient from the Carquinez Strait to the Delta and from brackish to fresh water. 

Larry noted that wet years can be warm or cool. For example, 2011 was a cool year while 2006 was hot, particularly during July. Similarly, drought years can be cool or warm. The last drought was a very warm year, particularly in September, which is when the system typically cools down. 

Larry emphasized that temperature effects can be highly episodic, and temperature models may miss daily and/or hourly temperature variations that could affect smelt.

The primary goal of management is for fish to have access to cooler areas. The South Delta is already too warm, so it is advantageous to ensure there is a connection between the south and the north.

*Presentation: Larry Brown – Turbidity*

Larry emphasized that Delta Smelt like muddy water. Activities within the watershed, such as hydraulic mining and dam building, can affect sediment supply. He noted that both sediment supply and turbidity have decreased over time. However, current conditions are fairly stable except for very high flow events. 

Larry explained that turbidity is typically low in the late fall and winter until the first flush. Much of the sediment delivery comes from the Sacramento River, and then mixes into the Delta from north to south. Secchi depth measurements over the last two decades indicate the Delta is clearing. Larry also noted that good flow does not necessarily lead to high turbidity. 

In additional to seasonal and interannual fluctuations, turbidity also varies by region. Certain areas, such as the Cache Slough complex, tend to be more turbid than the Delta overall. Turbidity in a given region can be influenced by wind, tidal pumping, dispersion, bathymetry, and the amount of erodible sediment. 

Finally, Larry stressed the importance of accounting for temperature, turbidity, salinity, and food simultaneously when considering transient habitat conditions. 

*Discussion of Temperature and Turbidity Presentations by Larry Brown*

* A TWG member noted that people often think there is a need for more flow to cool the Delta, but it is important to remember how influential air temperature is. 
* A TWG member asked if parts of the tidal marsh are cooler than others.
* A TWG member noted that just because you are farther west does not necessarily mean the temperature is cooler. 
* A TWG member pointed out that temperatures in Montezuma Slough are often warmer than Grizzly Bay.
  + Larry noted that the model might be missing some parts of the system as it does not account for all variables and agrees with TWG members that it would be interesting to look at a region at a finer scale to track water exchanges more specifically and how they impact temperature. 
* A TWG member suggested that it is important to keep in mind that temperature can be affected by turbidity. The TWG member also noted that shading can have a cooling effect in small channels, and water going over banks during high tides can result in cooler water within wetlands. 
* A TWG member asked about cooling at night in Suisun Marsh. 
  + Larry replied that it rarely occurs and existing models do not always capture it. 
* TWG members noted that most places in the Delta are well-mixed and do not show significant differences in temperature. The largest difference is typically about 2 degrees Celsius.
* A TWG member asked if there are places where groundwater inputs affect water temperature.
  + Larry responded that he isn’t sure if that has been looked at in the Delta, but groundwater can be a natural refuge. 
  + A TWG member noted that deep pockets can imply the presence of a temperature difference.
* A TWG member asked if any surveys have taken water temperatures in the bottom of river channels.
  + Larry replied that the Directed Outflow Project has collected this data. 
  + A TWG member added that the Fall Midwater Trawl Survey and Summer Townet Survey also take bottom temperatures but do not publicly report the data. 
* A TWG member asked if fish prefer algae or sediment for turbidity.
  + Larry replied that fish do not care whether turbidity is organic or not, they just prefer darker water. In fish culture, algae remains suspended longer and provides more benefits than sediments like bentonite clay. 

*Discussion of Candidate Management Actions*

* A TWG member commented that regulations to manage entrainment include environmental policies related to fish passages, building reservoirs etc. When discussing potential actions, it is important to consider the following:
  + Water operations reflect current regulations.
  + Current regulations require export reductions when turbidity triggers are met during April through June.
* A TWG member noted that according to the 2019 BiOp, during the first flush period, turbidity and flow act as a trigger to reduce pumping. This, in turn, reduces fish in the entrainment zone, and is a preventative action drawn from looking at historical data. 
* A TWG member asked if the group should consider an action intended to achieve zero entrainment. This could include targeting barriers.
  + TWG members suggested a two gates action or habitat barriers (similar to Franks Tract).
* A TWG member noted the last high entrainment episode was in 2006, which suggests the actions taken to date are already reducing entrainment. They asked what the goal of entrainment actions would be.
  + A TWG member commented that entrainment may be an issue for survival between life stages.
  + Another TWG member suggested that low population was the cause of low entrainment in recent years, not actions targeted to reduce entrainment.
* Compass pointed out that entrainment was rated as a lower priority on the hypothesis list and that the “status quo” should be considered along with other options. While this process is in an exploratory phase, it is worth discussing actions broadly, but the group should keep in mind that they will need to be more specific when it comes to modeling actions and scenarios.
* An observer suggested the TWG may want to consider a North Delta flow action along with the BiOp Summer-Fall Habitat actions.
  + The group noted this would be part of a broad category of actions within the Resiliency Strategy. Compass will coordinate with DWR to better understand these actions. 

## Next Steps and Work Planning
***

*Upcoming Meetings*

* Thursday, April 23 from 1:00 to 4:00 pm
  + Revisit Actions
* Friday, May 8 from 9:00 am to 12:00 pm)
  + Guest speaker: Evan Carson (FWS) on supplementation
* The project team will select meeting dates for late May and Late June based on the most recent Doodle Poll results.