# Technical Working Group Meeting 14
***
 
**April 23, 2020**
 
## Participants
***
 
### Technical Working Group
* Shawn Acuña, Metropolitan Water District (MWD)
* Mike Beakes, United States Bureau of Reclamation (USBR)
* Bill Bennett, UC Davis, John Muir Institute of the Environment and Center for Watershed Sciences 
* Larry Brown, United States Geological Survey (USGS)
* Erin Cole, United States Fish & Wildlife Service (FWS)
* Lauren Damon, IEP
* Ben Geske, Delta Science Program (DSP)
* Scott Hamilton, Coalition for a Sustainable Delta
* Sam Luoma, UC Davis, John Muir Institute of the Environment
* Randall Mager, California Department of Water Resources (DWR)
* Deanna Sereno, Contra Costa Water District (CCWD)
* Will Smith, United States Fish & Wildlife Service (FWS)
* Ted Sommer, California Department of Water Resources (DWR)
* Kate Spear, NOAA

### Project Team
* Mary Beth Day, Kearns & West
* Alyson Scurlock, Kearns & West 
* Graham Long, Compass Resource Management
* Dan Ohlson, Compass Resource Management
* Bruce DiGennaro, The Essex Partnership/CSAMP Program Manager
* Mike Urkov, FlowWest

### Guest Observers 
* Rosemary Hartman, California Department of Water Resources (DWR)
* Brycen Swart, California Department of Fish and Wildlife (CDFW)

## Action Items
***
* Project team to circulate the actions spreadsheet from Mike Beakes and colleagues.
* Compass to update the new management action spreadsheet and circulate to TWG members for their review.
* Compass to present preliminary documentation of the effects pathways at an upcoming meeting (date TBD) for TWG members to review.
* Compass and FlowWest to meet to discuss coordination of the conceptual model/effects pathway documentation process and the forthcoming numerical modelling data management and documentation process. 
* Kearns & West to share calendar invitations for May 22, 26, and 29.
* Kearns & West to circulate Doodle Poll for June meeting dates.

## Key Agreements or Outcomes
***
TWG members agreed that documentation of effects pathways will need to be carefully reviewed. TWG members supported the structure of the candidate management actions spreadsheet and agreed to review their submissions to start refining actions. 

## Introductions
***
The project team reviewed the agenda and TWG members introduced themselves. 

## Working Group Discussion – Documentation 
***
The project team identified big picture tasks under Phase 2 of the work plan and recapped the TWG’s progress. 

* Task 1: Defining Delta Smelt Objectives/Sub-Objectives.
  + The project team is in the process of refining and documenting these. 
* Task 2: Identify Candidate Management Actions. 
  + The project team has been gathering and discussing various submissions by TWG members. The project team and TWG members will continue to structure and refine the long list of actions in the candidate management actions spreadsheet. 
* Task 3: Explore Analytical Methods/Models.
  + The Bioenergetics Model will likely be one of the models used. May TWG meetings will focus on exploring different methods, models, and analytical tools. 
* Task 4: Technical Documentation of Effects Pathways. 
  + Additional funding has been secured for resources to assist with documentation efforts. ESSA will be a subcontractor to Compass for this effort. 

The project team and TWG members discussed documentation.

* TWG members asked for clarification regarding ESSA’s role in the documentation process and expressed concern that ESSA would be capturing TWG perspectives without listening to TWG discussions.
  + The project team wants to systematically document the work of the TWG in a way that accurately documents agreement within the TWG. The goal is to produce readable products for people outside of the TWG. While ESSA has not attended TWG meetings, they have access to notes and key documents. 
  + The project team noted there has always been a need identified for additional skillsets for documentation as the SDM process progressed. The process needs appropriate documentation to be open and transparent. The documentation support role was initially intended to be filled by agency staff but they had limited capacity, so outside consultants were considered. ESSA is funded by the PWA’s as a subcontract to Compass. 
* A TWG member acknowledged the importance of documentation and transparency, but suggested it will require careful review from TWG members. The TWG member expressed concern that review could be time-consuming and could lead to delays in the process. 
  + The project team said they are trying to get to the point where everyone agrees with how things are modeled. TWG members can carefully review the first draft to make sure there is agreement on what is being represented. The project team hopes this will not be a substantial task for TWG members. 
  + Another TWG member reiterated the value of documentation and expressed support for Compass’s proposed process. They noted it is an inevitable step that needs to be taken to provide background for modeling, and it will require significant time and effort regardless for the TWG to come to agreement that the TWG’s thoughts are accurately documented. 
* A project team member emphasized the value of building an open data repository as part of the proposed modeling effort, as well as ensuring documentation was linked to a model. This approach allows work to have a higher chance of being sustainable and establishing a sense of permanence.  
  + Compass agreed, and confirmed that the goal of this process includes building an open data repository and approach so that the work of the TWG can be built on by future efforts. 
* The project team will bring a documentation sample back to the TWG for discussion. 

## Working Group Discussion – Candidate Management Actions
***
The project team reviewed new TWG submissions and asked the TWG for feedback on the revised structure of the candidate management action spreadsheet. 

* A TWG member submitted a spreadsheet that included their colleagues’ additions of actions and supporting documentation relating to the 2019 Biological Opinion. 
  + The project team will circulate the spreadsheet for the TWG to review.
* A TWG member said the spreadsheet was an improvement from where they started but they needed additional time to review as there is a lot of interaction between items in the spreadsheet.
* A TWG member said it was a nice way to lay out assumptions, pathways, and management actions but it was unclear the extent that effects can be quantified. The TWG member asked if it was worth spending a lot of time flushing out thinking about the system if they ultimately were not going to measure these things.
* A TWG member agreed that there are a lot of subtleties and asked how much could actually be modeled. The first order processes are the only things that can likely be prioritized for the model.
  + The project team said they originally wanted to cast a wide net for actions to produce a diverse list of ideas. Ideas will be consolidated before deciding which ones will be further analyzed. 
* A TWG member suggested not getting too fixated on what can be modeled and reiterated the need to go beyond modeling.
  + A TWG member agreed that you can still assess the benefits of an action beyond a model by using expert judgements.
* A TWG member asked how the project team and TWG were going to proceed with the spreadsheet. The list is getting very long and is going to require a lot of discussion.
  + The project team said they want to characterize broad and specific actions and the spreadsheet structure is now able to consolidate ideas more clearly.
* The project team said they would clean up the spreadsheet and recirculate it back to TWG members for members to review their submissions. The group agreed to schedule small group conversations to review and refine the spreadsheet.
* The project team asked TWG members for feedback on evaluation criteria that could be applied to actions to help refine the spreadsheet prior to modeling efforts. TWG members can rank actions collectively, or individually and then compare notes.
  + A TWG member agreed that it could be done individually first but acknowledged it will take a lot of talking through actions to evaluate and bin them.  

## Next Steps and Work Planning
***

*Upcoming Meetings*

* Friday, May 8 from 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m.
  + Guest speaker: Evan Carson (FWS) on supplementation
* Friday, May 22 from 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m.
  + Speaker: Will Smith (FWS) on Bioenergetics Model
* Tuesday, May 26 from 1:00 to 4:00 p.m.
  + Speaker: Scott Hamilton (Coalition for a Sustainable Delta) on affinity analysis
* Friday, May 29 from 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m.
  + Discuss modeling and analyses
* Friday, June 5 from 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m.
  + Guest speaker: Lenny Grimaldo (ICF) on entrainment
* Additional meetings in June to discuss documentation will be scheduled by the project team.

