# Technical Working Group Meeting 16
***
 
**May 22, 2020**
 
## Participants
***
 
### Technical Working Group
* Shawn Acuña, Metropolitan Water District (MWD)
* Mike Beakes, United States Bureau of Reclamation (USBR)
* Larry Brown, United States Geological Survey (USGS)
* Erin Cole, United States Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS)
* Lauren Damon, Interagency Ecological Program (IEP) 
* Scott Hamilton, Coalition for a Sustainable Delta
* Sam Luoma, UC Davis, John Muir Institute of the Environment
* Randy Mager, DWR
* Deanna Sereno, Contra Costa Water District
* Will Smith, United States Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS)
* Ted Sommer, California Department of Water Resources (DWR)

### Project Team
* Mary Beth Day, Kearns & West
* Alyson Scurlock, Kearns & West 
* Graham Long, Compass Resource Management
* Dan Ohlson, Compass Resource Management
* Mike Urkov, FlowWest

### Guest Observers 
* Rosemary Hartman, California Department of Water Resources (DWR)
* Emanuel Rodriguez, FlowWest
* Sadie Gill, FlowWest

## Action Items
***
* Larry to connect Will with Sam Bashevin (DSP) regarding turbidity data.
* Rosemary to share carbon content data with Will and Scott.
* Will to share slides and Rapid Prototyping reference with Deanna.
* Compass to coordinate small group discussions to continue to fill in the actions spreadsheet.

## Key Agreements or Outcomes
***
TWG members agreed that the effects pathways documentation is a helpful tool to build consensus moving forward but it is necessary to label the document as work done by a facilitator or Compass. TWG members supported the idea of the Delta Smelt Bioenergetics Model being an open data source.

## Introductions
***
The Project Team reviewed the agenda and attendance roster for TWG members.

## Working Group Discussion – Delta Smelt Bioenergetics Model
***

*Presentation on Delta Smelt Bioenergetics Model*

Will Smith (FWS) shared an overview of the Delta Smelt Bioenergetics Model. He reviewed how the model has evolved through five different versions since 2013 and potential opportunities for future research that could improve modeling for Delta Smelt. Version 5 of the model is being proposed to support the SDM process and seems to accurately simulate changes in Delta Smelt abundance and growth.

*Discussion on Bioenergetics Model*

The group discussed Will’s presentation on the Delta Smelt Bioenergetics Model.

* A TWG member offered to put Will in contact with Sam Bashevin at the Delta Science Program to help with the last five years of missing turbidity data. Sam has collected all secchi data until recently.  
* A TWG member shared that there has been research done on carbon content. 
  + An observer said that they would share carbon content files with anyone interested.
* A TWG member asked how the Peterson version of the model used CalSim data to estimate zooplankton and if it matched observed data.
  + Will said he did not look in depth at the Peterson model since it only represented six prey types and later model versions characterized 12 prey types. 
  + A TWG member had a similar question because CalSim data does not simulate observed flows; instead, it simulates the regulatory requirements and does not change over time. Permits came online during the observed period the model is looking at. 
  + Will said early years in the model, around 1980 to 1990 or 2000, were simulated. That is how the model got around the issue. 
* A TWG member asked how survival was calculated in the model.
  + Will said survival is a function of fish size. As fish get larger, natural mortality rates decline because predation rates decline. The model was updated in 2018 to assume that mortality was a result of predation and a relationship with turbidity was added. This is why secchi depth was one of the variables. The Hasenbein et al. (2013) paper documented the survival relationship with turbidity and strong assumptions were made on how to model that. A stepped decline in mortality with turbidity increase was included in this version of the model.
* A TWG member asked what variables reproduction depends on in the model. 
  + Will said a fish has the opportunity to spawn three times and the third one is dependent on temperature. The Damon et al. (2017) paper includes most dynamics for the reproductive model.
* A TWG member asked what the time step of the model is. 
  + Will said the time step for the model is monthly. The model started on a daily time step, but Peterson moved it to a monthly time step to match CalSim data. 
  + A TWG member said a lot of issues are related to mismatch between daily and monthly timesteps. They encouraged the group to discuss converting the Bioenergetics Model back to a daily time step as soon as possible. 
* A TWG member asked if Will’s version of the model will be documented and made accessible for others to use.
  + The project team said the vision is to move the SDM process on a path to documentation similar to CVPIA efforts, where all data inputs would be online for anyone to use. 
  + A TWG member said it sounded like a reasonable approach and that they would like the model accessible for someone to use for climate change problems if applicable. The TWG member asked if the code would be available for people to use for other purposes.
  + Will suggested that is the plan but if the model is not posted online as part of this process, he is happy to share it regardless. It has been advantageous to have an open model all along.
  + A project team member said the approach to open science is valuable as the model can be shared while still documenting how the process evolves over time.
* A project team member asked if there were any actions involving flow responses. They wanted to verify that movement cannot be simulated in the model.
  + Will said that is the limitation of the model. They have discussed adding movement by making assumptions because some parameter assumptions can be based on a quantitative model, but the movement model and its relationship with actions will be tough to incorporate.
* A project team member asked about the timeline for addressing future research opportunities. Some things could be documented for the Science Plan in the future while others will need expert judgements in the near term.  
  + Will said he created the future research slide for issues that could be addressed in the coming years, such as prey, the growth model, and movement. Modeling all five variables (prey density, temperature, Delta Smelt distribution, OMR, and secchi depth) will take a combination of expert judgment and quantitative models, when applicable.  
* A project team member asked Will’s preference for how the model would be used.
  + Will said his preference would be to loop through representative years as this was likely the most defensible approach. 
* A project team member asked if additional variables could be incorporated into the model outside of the five variables.
  + Will said there was a system of equations with a couple dozen parameters. How parameters would change would rely on pretty strong assumptions.
  + A TWG member said surrogates have been used in the past for parameters for this type of effort. There is a lot more data on reproduction, survival, movement, and growth. 

## Working Group Discussion – Documentation
***
The project team presented the first draft of the effects pathways documentation to the TWG. The goal is to document the key knowns and uncertainties around pathways in the conceptual model to enable better engagement in modeling assumption conversations. A few TWG members have reviewed this documentation example in the last week.

* A TWG member appreciated the thoroughness of the documentation and noted they felt it would be important for TWG members to carefully review the documents. They asked how much was completed by ESSA and how much was pulled from the TWG discussions.
  + The project team said the documentation has been a joint effort. ESSA has been organizing it around statements and then referencing TWG meeting notes/presentations to make sure any additional information has been incorporated. 
  + A TWG member that reviewed the contaminants documentation said there are things that are missed or are overemphasized, which was their concern with ESSA from the beginning. They reiterated that reviewing the documentation will take a lot of work on the TWG’s part and everyone needs to make sure the final document is one they can stand by. They suggested that using direct quotes in the documentation is a good idea and avoids potentially controversial interpretations. 
  + The project team said the overall structure was created by Compass. They have been reviewing previous meeting notes and developing bulleted statements that encompass what they think they have heard from the TWG. If everyone is not in agreement on the key bullets, then there is more work to do. One of the goals of the group is to reach agreement on pathways and how to model them.
* A TWG member asked about the process of development of each of the sections given the concerns with the time it will take to review. Documentation needs to happen after meeting discussions and everyone in the TWG needs to review before moving on, otherwise only certain voices will be translated into the review of the document. 
  + The project team said that the documents are an integration of what is heard in TWG meetings and documentation from key aggregate documents. The intent is not to make everyone go through a lengthy review process or create another aggregate document. The project team suggested making it clear in the document that the work is by the facilitator or Compass to help relieve concerns.
  + A TWG member said that it would be helpful to label the document in that manner, but it still would not resolve all time issues. 
  + A TWG member agreed that stating it is Compass’s approach is necessary, but there will still be concerns. Everyone needs to be aware of all edits to the document and review each new draft. This could be a bit more work and require more beyond the first review.
  + A TWG member suggested deciding an absolute deadline for feedback to prevent the addition of last-minute comments. Controversial items in the documents could also be flagged for discussion with the group. 
* The project team asked TWG members who reviewed the documentation for their feedback.
  + A TWG member said they thought it was a good document to house all the information talked about in TWG meetings and it would be a helpful tool to build consensus.
  + A TWG member also said they thought it was useful. They initially were concerned with what was being cited in the documents, as the direct contaminant literature was not being cited. They are hoping the review process will not be lengthy if it is kept to small groups. 
  + A TWG member suggested having another discussion after the project team sends the documents around once they are complete. The TWG member agreed these documents are important to have to help build consensus moving forward, but it is important that all TWG members review them. 
  + The project team will share the documents with the group when they are ready for review and noted that TWG members can add quotes from the literature. 

## Working Group Discussion – Candidate Management Actions
***
The project team reviewed the candidate management actions spreadsheet and indicated they would continue the process of refining actions via small group discussions. The goal is to have a handful of actions that stand out as a good starting point to do modeling and evaluation in the fall. 

The project team and TWG continued to discuss new candidate management actions in the spreadsheet.

* A TWG member suggested creating a protective nursery, i.e. a fairly large area in which eggs could be distributed absent any fish that might prey on larvae. 
* A TWG member submitted an idea on diversions focused on figuring out what the correct flows are to be protective of Delta Smelt/how to divert water without hurting fish.  
  + A TWG member was intrigued with this idea but would have to see data to determine if it was possibly useful or feasible. A lot of money has been spent trying to figure out flows and there are a lot of politics around the issue. 
  + A TWG member asked if this could be done at the current scale of diversions.
  + A TWG member said they think it can be done at the current scale of diversions and that they understood the politics surrounding the issue were complex.  
* A TWG member noted that some of these ideas are really creative and asked the project team if there will be a way to incorporate how much work the action would require and the timelines of implementation into the evaluation process. Some actions will require a lot of time and resources to implement while others will require less work. 
  + The project team said that they need to think more about how to rank the actions. Timelines of implementation should be a factor when thinking about which actions might be examined, but there should be a diversity of short, medium, and long-term actions.
* A TWG member suggested constructing a fish passageway to increase access to food and turbid water and to provide an escape from warm water for Delta Smelt. Certain features of the Deep Water Ship Channel are attractive to Delta Smelt, so perhaps there could be a way to replicate some of those conditions in a passageway that also mimics natural meandering waterways. 
  + A TWG member was highly concerned with how hydrodynamics of the system would be altered through this action since it would not be a natural connection. There would be a difference in tides hitting the channel from either end which could be more confusing for the fish than helpful. The impact could be assessed by adding the channel to the hydrodynamic model.
  + A TWG member agreed that modeling might be a good next step but that most of the Delta has been significantly engineered so there has not been any type of natural system over the last 100 years. Big projects will need to be considered to have a meaningful impact on the problems in Suisun Marsh.
  + A TWG member suggested that the North Bay Aqueduct could be engineered instead.
  + A TWG member agreed that the Aqueduct could be considered, but that the bulk of Delta Smelt are in the Ship Channel during certain times of the year. The Ship Channel is totally manmade, but Delta Smelt are using it.
  + A TWG member said Delta Smelt use the Ship Channel because there is maximum turbidity there and a highly productive food source in the upstream portion. It is a totally engineered situation that happened by accident. They suggested the group should not be in the mind frame of solving engineering problems with more engineering. 
  + A TWG member agreed that engineering can make situations worse as well as better, and this action is a very long-term possibility that requires intense investigation.
  + A TWG member stated that this engineering solution could be an interesting one as a channel could be created with decent habitat. The TWG member suggested using a tidal control gate to alleviate the concern for tides. It could be advantageous that the tides are completely different. 
  + A TWG member liked the tidal control gate idea and suggested it could be more effectively managed. 

## Next Steps and Work Planning
***

*Upcoming Meetings*

The project team reviewed upcoming meetings. 

* Tuesday, May 26 from 1:00 to 4:00 p.m.
  + Speaker: Scott Hamilton (Coalition for a Sustainable Delta) on affinity analysis
* Friday, May 29 from 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m.
  + Speakers: Scott Hamilton on performance analysis and Will Smith on Life Cycle Model
* Friday, June 5 from 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m.
  + Guest speaker: Lenny Grimaldo (ICF) on entrainment
  + Speaker: Shawn Acuna (MWD) on Maunder and Deriso Model
* Friday, June 19 from 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m.
  + Discuss modeling needs
* TWG meetings will pause over summer and resume in September. In the meantime, the project team will continue to make progress on documentation and the Phase 2 report.  