# Technical Working Group Meeting 11		
***

**March 13, 2020**

## Participants
***

### Technical Working Group
* Ben Geske, Delta Science Program (DSP)
* Brycen Swart, CA Department of Fish and Wildlife (CDFW)
* Erin Cole, United States Fish & Wildlife Service (FWS)
* Will Smith, United States Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS)
* Lauren Damon, Interagency Ecological Program (IEP)
* Shawn Acuña, Metropolitan Water District (MWD)
* Scott Hamilton, Coalition for a Sustainable Delta
* Mike Beakes, United States Bureau of Reclamation (USBR)
* Sam Luoma, UC Davis, John Muir Institute of the Environment
* Deanna Sereno, Contra Costa Water District 
* Kate Spear, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
* Larry Brown, United States Geological Survey (USGS)

### Project Team
* Mary Beth Day, Kearns & West
* Nora De Cuir, Kearns & West 
* Dan Ohlson, Compass Resource Management
* Bruce DiGennaro, Essex
* Mike Urkov, Flow West

### Presenters/Guests
* Richard Connon, UC Davis, School of Veterinary Medicine
* Swee Teh, UC Davis, School of Veterinary Medicine
* Susanne Brander, Oregon State University, College of Agricultural Sciences 

## Action Items
***
* TWG members to keep working on management actions using XLS spreadsheet
* TWG members to continue inputting references into key reference list
* Compass to follow up with Bill Bennett and Brittany Davis re. coordination on resiliency strategy actions
* Compass to coordinate with Scott regarding potential presentation
* Project Team to reach out to identified entrainment experts for April 8 presentation
* Project Team to poll TWG again, adding new dates for May and June meetings 
* Shawn Acuña to share research findings from Wayne Landos 
* Shawn Acuña to share document on chemical removal of contaminants
* Shawn Acuña to ask Project Work team members about tailwater channels
* Mike Beakes and Erin Cole to coordinate on BiOp actions

## Key Agreements or Outcomes
***
* In response to contaminant presentation, presenters confirm that contaminants are not a single stressor and generalizations should not be made about their effects.
* The TWG discusses need for specificity in identifying management actions. Agrees that it will be messy but necessary step to encourage creative solutions. Compass will assist in synthesizing. 
* TWG members conclude that BiOps stand to play a controversial role in group process but TWG should work to help resolve these conflicts through process of identifying management actions. 

## Introductions
***
* The Project Team reviewed the agenda and TWG members introduced themselves.

## Working Group Discussion
***
*Presentation: Richard Connon - Impacts of Contaminants in the Bay Delta*

* Contaminants are NOT a single stressor; there are different classes, modes of action, toxicities, application uses and times/locations. They generally act as mixtures.
* Turbidity isn’t a single entity either. It is composed of various particulate matter of different origins, size, form and structure – all interact with light. Are often measured as a single parameter. 
* Temp, flow and salinity, depending on how you define it, are single stressors. They are easy parameters to measure, by comparison to turbidity and contaminants, and to some extent, easier to control.
* Cites three key references: 
  + Fong et al, 2016. Contaminant Effects on CA Bay-Delta Species and Human Health
  + Hobbs et al, 2017. Is Extinction Inevitable for Delta Smelt and Longfin Smelt? An Opinion and Recommendations for Recovery.
  + Connon et al, 2019. Review of and Recommendations for Monitoring Contaminants and their Effects in the SF Bay-Delta.
* Table from Fong et al – Sublethal effect-based assessments of contaminants.
  + Gathered data on delta species – shows how contaminants impact different species.
  + From Left – measurements highly sensitive to right – ecological.
  + Red circles represent areas where we have data for Delta Smelt – know a lot of pyrethroid, ammonia/ammonium, and samples collected from the field. Want to focus on reproduction and behavior today. Using recent work with Susanne Brander.
* Photomotor behavior paradigm graphs – these were developed for Zebrafish and shows that they behave consistently in light/dark behavioral assays. We need a trigger to get them to move. Turn light on/off to get info on how they respond.
  + Delta Smelt also behave consistently in light/dark, though opposite of Zebrafish. They move in light while Zebrafish move in dark. 
* Exposure to different compounds can induce various photomotor abnormalities. Measured hyperactivity, hypoactivity and ways an organism responds to light/dark or contaminants.
  + Could be a change, a delayed change, or no movement.
* Methodology: Work with early larvae which still have yolk sac. As they emerge from egg, yolk sac is at high risk for absorption of contaminants. Also, most contaminants are hydrophobic so they are looking for something to bind to.
  + Use a camera, plate and place individual larvae in each well in the plate, then set parameters as desired. Controlled flow; controlled temp; 30-45 min tests.
* Looked at pyrethroids and organophosphates that are commonly found in the Delta. Used concentrations that are environmentally relevant and mirror those measured in the Cache Slough complex, tributaries, and wastewater effluent discharged to rivers.
  + Expose, let hatch, then measure at different points post-hatch.
* Results for pyrethroid insecticide: bifenthrin
  + Looked at exposure in dark and light periods to determine differences in movement relative to concentration. At 72 hrs, we begin see more movement in light than dark. Continues in 96 hrs where you begin to see significant difference across all concentrations.
  + At 96 hrs, all doses showed hyperactivity in the light periods compared to control, at environmentally relevant concentrations of bifenthrin.
  + Increase in behavior/hyperactivity with increased concentrations.
* Results for organophosphate pesticide – chloropyrifos
  + Seeing overall hypoactivity with increased concentrations.
  + Higher concentration we see a “U” shape and the dose response is changing at higher concentrations
* What we know from existing research re. Menidia beryllina
  + We are seeing responses across scales.
  + This (contamination) is projected to reduce population.
  + It is linked with reduced fecundity.
  + Can lead to changes in protein expression.
  + Can result in small changes in gene expression.
* Brander et al, 2016. *Transcriptomic changes underlie altered egg protein production and reduced fecundity in an estuarine model fish exposed to bifenthrin.*
  + Shows a reduced production of egg protein.
  + Reproductive output is affected for organisms who are exposed to bifenthrin while growing up.
    - Attributable to a delay in the ripening of females and therefore a delay in reproduction. Most eggs are laid in days 10-21 rather than 1-9. 
* White et al, 2017. *Scaling Up Endocrine Disrupting Effects From Individuals to Populations: Outcomes Depend on How Many Males a Population Needs.*
  + Shows masculinization of silversides.
  + Most females are sex-reversed males with 50% reduced fecundity, hence a low population. despite moderately biased sex ration. 
  + Subtle changes in hormone/gene expression can shift outcomes at a population level.
* Organisms respond to multiple stressors in unpredictable ways.
  + We are unlikely to be able to predict how animals will respond to multiple environmental stressors.
  + Approximately 75% of multiple stressor experiments demonstrate non-linear interactions.
* Overall for Delta Smelt, when they are hit with a contaminant, they will experience a habitat compression/distortion shown as a shrinkage in niche breadth. 
* A.L. Obrien el al, 2019. After Decades of Stressor Research in Urban Estuarine Ecosystems the Focus is Still on Single Stressors
  + Literature Review shows little focus on multiple stressors.
  + Focus on single stressors is fundamentally flawed approach. 

*Questions related to presentation by Richard Connon* 

* A TWG member asks how well these contaminants are monitored in the Bay-Delta. In past SDM efforts, there has been a lack of data on how contaminants are distributed in space and time. 
  + Richard confirms that there is a huge lack. Most measurements focus on first flush. The SWAMP program does measurements more regularly, but still only 2x/year. USGS has done the most monitoring but it is very sporadic.
* A TWG member asks if the majority of pyrethroid contamination comes from urban areas with some agricultural run-off hotspots, as seen in the American River. 
  + Richard confirms that the majority comes from urban runoff and wastewater treatment. 
* A TWG member notes that the diagram showing shrinkage in niche breadth is helpful. Are there any temperature refuges? If temperature refuges are associated with potential for high run-off or high loading, we should consider this when we think about potential actions. Perhaps this is an example of a principal we might be able to use in addressing the impact of contaminants.
  + Richard indicates that as it relates to location, he believes they spawn in the Cache Slough complex, generally with rain flush events when there is a lot of pyrethroid, organophosphate and other contamination. This poses an immediate risk to hatching Delta Smelt. This is a co-occurrence and co-location. More than 250 compounds have been measured there. This location, as well as areas like Ulatis Creek, agricultural areas and the floodplain should be the focus for remediation. 
* A TWG member notes that he is collaborating with a researcher, Wayne Landos, who is evaluating contaminant data referred to by Mike Beakes and Richard to determine how well it could be used in modeling. They are expecting a report within the month and are optimistic. Will share when it is published.
* A TWG member notes that Stan Long, a toxicologist and modeler, is working on contaminants related to urban runoff in watershed catchment areas. He is working on tracking the origin of the contaminants and could be part of our model.
* Richard notes that multigenerational epigenetics studies are needed.
* Susanne refers to a recent call with SFDI on work with silversides in which they were exposed to four chemicals for 21 days post hatch at 3 ng/L. They were reared to F2 larval stage. Though many effects were isolated to F0 and F1, there was some indication of carryover to offspring of exposed parents. It is disconcerting that this is happening at such low concentrations. We have started modeling the effects of exposure over generations; considering cumulative effect, effect on population size, number of offspring, hatching success, embryonic development. Adding multiple generations complicates things but is important to consider even if only by way of adding potential for multi-generational carry-over effect as a model parameter. 
* Swee asks about the degree to which species might have the ability to adapt to contamination.
  + Susanne responds that when a methyl group is added to cytosine, we are seeing effects out to F2 at the DNA methylation level, with effects on metabolism, in particular. Appears there is greater likelihood for adverse effects than adaptation but hard to tell unless we rear to F3 or F4. Adaptation may be possible but how long will it take and how will it affect annual species versus longer-lived species.
* Richard notes that we need to be careful when discussing adaptation. Some contaminants bioaccumalate 1000-fold.
* Susanne notes that exposures aren’t happening in a vacuum. There are also higher temperatures and salinity changes.  We are looking at how higher temps with the same concentrations of contaminants might exacerbate impacts including carryover into later generations. 
* A TWG member notes that in some cases it may be less about availability of data as about using good judgment. Asks about the ability to compare Delta Smelt with silversides physiologically.
  + Richard indicates that Delta Smelt are more sensitive to toxicity than silversides at all lifestages. We are currently doing comparisons focused on behavior at larval stage with regard to gene expression responses. 
  + Susanne agrees that the affects of contamination on Delta Smelt will likely be worse but should have more data within two years. 
  + Swee notes that the mortality rate when raising Delta Smelt from hatch to 15 days is very high – asks how to bypass that when doing this research.
  + Richard answers that that is why they use 96-hour exposure, which is before they begin feeding. It is the onset of feeding that increases the risks associate with mortality increases. They see no mortality in the 96-hr window including from exposure as they are using sub-lethal doses.
  + Swee notes that a lot goes on during the larval stage that might make it difficult to identify the effects of chemical exposure.
  + Richard explains that they are looking at impacts on development stemming from research on zebrafish and silversides. We see both effects on behavior as well as the cause of those effects – neurological impairment. We are working at a high throughput conducting 96 hr tests with dozens of chemicals.
  + A TWG member asks if Richard has looked at conceptual models, indicating that that is how the TWG will try to insert contaminant data. Wants guidance on how it might affect boxes or arrows and how to quantify in the wild. 
  + Richard responds that it is dangerous to try and generalize the impacts of contaminants as different doses, temperatures, and salinities as these are all variables that affect impacts.
  + Susanne asks if the model has been circulated and it is agreed that the Project Team will send to all who have not seen it yet.
  + Richard indicates that he is happy to answer further questions. 

*Discussion of Candidate Action Spreadsheet*

* Compass directs the TWG to the diagrams and focuses on larvae to juvenile stage; explains that they are trying to identify management actions that might benefit Delta Smelt across all life stages and to evaluate the costs and benefits of those actions. In trying to figure out how to brainstorm actions, we start on the left and see that flow and natural conditions drive the whole system and influences turbidity and salinity. In turn, these transient habitat conditions like temperature and turbidity, can influence spatial distribution. Contaminants can influence any given strata of the model. We think this model can work in the way Richard was encouraging. 
  + Compass asks if the presentation by Richard, Susanne and Swee results in a need to modify the conceptual model.
  + Swee responds that the conceptual model seems good. Flow can really change distribution and everything can be pushed down to a brackish region, where the survival and health of larvae should increase. Flow actions are important in terms of where larvae will be during the year. 
  + Susanne indicates that this model seems reasonable. Glad that contaminant actions are factored in when considering spatial distribution and other factors like food availability and predation. Things like contaminants effects on prey species which might impact the ability of Delta Smelt to attain food.  How would we capture that in this model?
* A TWG member notes that fecundity should possibly be added to far right box with growth and survival for this life stage.
* A TWG member notes that in thinking about actions to reduce contaminants and their impacts on fecundity, that Cache Slough is a good place to focus. 
  + Compass asks if this would look like an action under A18 to manage flow as well an action under A29. Notes that Shawn has brainstormed some actions under A29.
* Compass directs us to the Management Actions spreadsheet with that Shawn has partially filled out. 
* Shawn notes that there are a number of things that can be done, in theory, with the appropriate authority. Source control, for example, would have the largest effect on reducing contaminant loading into the environment. Is considered very effective. The problem is that we need weight of evidence that a given contaminant is a problem. Also “whack-a-mole” regulation, whereby as soon as one contaminant is eliminated, another comes in. 
  + Swee indicates agreement with Shawn, though notes that reducing one chemical only to replace it with another doesn’t remove the overall contaminant issue.
  + Shawn, agreed. The effect is only temporary.
* Shawn notes that another option includes chemical treatment that can change or reduce the effects of the contaminants, similar to what is done in a wastewater treatment plant. The fundamental premise is to transform the way the chemical acts. Examples include: change pH or adding reagents to reduce the effects. Nitrogen contaminants can be treated this way for example. Phosphates can be treated to precipitate out and then be physically removed. Can also utilize filtration to bind contaminants to active carbon. Another approach includes agricultural drains whereby plants are used to provide the surface for bacterial transformation, which in turn, reduces toxicity. Settling basins are an example of physical removal – i.e. the Cache Creek settling basin used to remove mercury. During Phase 1 of this process, we did some calculations on a mixture of remediation and physical removal using chemical treatment like a wetland.  This showed a 25% reduction in contaminants. Shawn will share this document.
  + Shawn indicates that he has put many of these in the XLS sheet, though without specifics. Many of the actions require a lot of knowledge and there is always potential that certain actions might exacerbate other issues.
  + Also important to note that there may be slight changes in the actions from one life cycle to the next given a different time of year.
* A TWG member notes that they agree with other group members regarding the efficacy of source control and banning of chemicals. Agrees that Cache Slough might be a good target location for actions. Specifically: 1) reducing mercury; 2) addressing irrigation drainage from San Joaquin side in light of selenium and pesticides; 3) upgrading of the Sacramento waste treatment plant; 4) managing flows -  when evaluating flow experiments, remember to consider contaminants.
* Shawn notes that some people find treatment actions – i.e. physical/chemical removal – less effective and push back against them. Instead they support source control. 
* A TWG member notes that they agree with comments so far on actions related to contaminants but suggests that the group also consider interactions. As it relates to sedimentation/turbidity, need to remember that these will interact with contaminant issues. For example, most sediments are contaminated with mercury. 
  + Shawn notes that a lot of research is being done on regulated floodplains wherein nutrients go hand-in-hand with mercury. Things that work on mercury, don’t work on contaminants and vice-versa.
  + Another TWG member reminds that we need to remain open to all possible actions at this point. 
* A TWG member asks about the possibility of tailwater channels as a means of reducing irrigation drainage. Asks how the agricultural community feels about this. 
  + Shawn replies that he is not aware but mentions that Mike Johnson and Melissa Turner are working on the project work team representing agriculture and will ask them.
* A TWG member mentions sediment injection as a possible action, noting that it costs millions of dollars and is an ambitious engineering project. Suggest that these kinds of projects could be targeted at reducing runoff into rivers and Cache Slough.
  + Shawn responds that of the three categories he listed, source control is the cheapest. Other 2 are expensive, but still worth considering. It’s all about the tradeoffs. 
* Swee: suggests checking with Bryn Phillips regarding her study on ag runoff wherein activated charcoal was used
  + Shawn notes that this strategy includes the use of hay bales and agrees that it looks promising.
* Compass asks the group to take a step back and revisit the XLS sheet. Asks if there is agreement that we will want to identify specific locations, life stages, costs etc. that correlate with actions. 
  + Shawn indicates that he attempted to identify specific areas of concern in his brainstorm, but Swee would know better the degree to which the various actions related to contaminants should be specifically correlated to locations. 
  + A TWG member indicates that in attempting to identify actions related to salinity zone, the need for a high level of detail was concerning. A15 might be the location for some actions, or A18, however the specificity might come from other areas of the effect.
* Compass agrees that this process could be unwieldy and will require the group to be iterative and efficient. At the same time, we don’t want to limit any creative thoughts. We can sort through some of this in the “tradeoffs” discussion we’re trying to set up. Compass indicates that TWG members should feel free to insert rows or categories using the current template as a guide. 
* Compass asks Shawn if his group has an action plan.
  + Shawn indicates that they do but it is at an early stage. 
  + Compass reminds that simultaneous to identifying management actions, we will also identify uncertainties and research priorities. Wants to make sure TWG is including these in their process.
* Compass asks the TWG to consider conditions that might trigger actions. Indicates that we want to start capturing that level of detail here. 
  + Shawn indicates that he put in storm events as an example of source control. The others are structures that are built so they are passive and not conditioned on a trigger. 
* Compass asks the group if this is making sense?
  + A TWG member asks if they should be begin filling in the sheet with this level of detail.
  + Compass indicates yes. It will be messy but Compass will digest and present the digested form to the TWG group for feedback.
* Compass notes the following leads for specific topic areas to avoid duplication, however encourages others to fill in as well:
  + BiOp Actions = Mike, Erin
    - Note: Erin volunteered on Salinity/LSZ topic as many BiOp actions are interrelated. Also, throughout process, we should evaluate old and new BiOps as some probably have relevant modeling.
  + Resiliency Strategy = Bill, Brittany Davis and Compass. Compass will follow up with B & B to facilitate coordination.
    - Will try to circulate sooner than later because know there’s overlap with these and other topics
  + Water Temp and turbidity = Larry
  + Food = Bill
  + Entrainment = Will, Mike B
  + Contaminants = Shawn
  + Salinity/LSZ = Erin
  + Rapid prototyping = Mike U/Compass
  + Adult/Larvae = Lauren
* A TWG member notes that after the last meeting, he reached out to the science division and they are working on their topic. Have a meeting on Monday, which he will share notes from to ensure they are headed in the right direction. They are making progress and should be done with draft soon for discussion. 
* Compass asks Erin if she will be able to coordinate with Mike on salinity. 
  + Mike and Erin agree to coordinate.
* A TWG member asks if comparing 2019 vs. 2008 BiOps should be a goal of this process.
  + Compass acknowledges that there has been some controversy around this topic, however seems logical that this be a part of the process. Would be addressed from the perspective of the Delta Smelt SDM process with the goal of finding the optimal strategy.
  + A TWG member notes that it has the potential to detract from the primary goal of identifying actions. 
  + Another TWG member notes a prior discussion related to actions imbedded in the 2008 BiOps. Should we be evaluating actions that appear to have been working for over a decade. Could be very political.
  + A TWG member seeks clarification on how to handle/incorporate actions that are already proposed or already in effect. 
  + Another TWG member responds that their understanding is that we should be thinking outside the box regardless of whether the action might get rejected. Explains that he is not getting to specific and using examples.
  + Another TWG member agrees that we should try not to stifle creativity, but to be careful in phrasing. Even “comparing 2019-2008” could be taken the wrong way.
  + A TWG member notes that BiOps are fundamentally controversial and politically motivated. CSAMP process was intended to help resolve some of the scientific conflicts. Perhaps we will be identifying actions that are not in either the 2008 or 2019 BiOps. Perhaps our role is to try and avoid political controversy and help resolve conflicts. 
    - Compass confirms that this is consistent with their understanding of the group’s mandate.
  + Compass mentions that in other SDM processes, the focus is generally on identifying creative options and then comparing them. However, this generally requires comparing against a reference point.  We are naïve about how to do this. What would be the status quo/reference in this situation? 
    - A TWG member asks whether the 2019 BiOps should be used as baseline?
  + Compass suggests that the group collectively identify develop a reference point. Seems it will emerge through the process of seeking optimal management actions, assuming we are all being forthright about tradeoffs. 
  + Compass concludes the conversation by asking TWG members to keep working on management actions. Encourages specificity and detailed documentation, noting that this will be a lengthy process. TWG members should feel free to reach out to Compass with questions.  

## Next Steps and Work Planning
***
* The Project Team checks in on the agenda, noting that two items remain: 1) a discussion about references and 2) scheduling. 
  + Compass suggests that references are a lower priority at this time. 
* The Project Team suggests a call on March 27 for continued discussion of management actions. Larry was identified to give a presentation about transient habitat at that time. 
  + Larry agrees that this will still work for him.
* Compass notes that it will coordinate with Scott on whether he will bring his presentation during the March 27 habitat discussion or during modeling discussion. 
* The Project Team notes that April 8 looks like a good date for meeting. Suggests that we could pursue a presentation on entrainment. Should we pursue folks who could present on this topic? Notes Will Smith, Lenny Grinaldo, Gonzalo Castillo. Rene Reyes were mentioned previously.
  + Will indicates he is happy to present on entrainment but would like to roll it into the modeling discussion. 
  + Compass agrees that that would make sense and proposes to include other experts in that regard to assist in collective modeling. Compass will reach out to some of these experts for a specific presentation. Will agrees to be active participant during modeling discussion. 
  + Project Team agrees to reach out to identify entrainment experts for a presentation on April 8. 
  + The Project Team notes that the initial goal was a meeting every two weeks, but running into issues. Current goal is a full day meeting in late April to focus on modeling but now seems we may have to defer until May. 
  + The Project Team proposes April 22, April 29 or May 1 for a 3 hour webinar to check in on the management actions exercise. The project team had tentatively identified May 8 for a presentation on any of a number of outstanding topics like hatchery augmentation. Additionally, a time for a full-day meeting is still needed.
    - The Project Team agrees to re-poll the TWG on date options.

*Upcoming Meetings*

* Friday, March 27: 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. – habitat presentation
* Wednesday, April 8 - TBD
