# Technical Working Group Meeting 19
***
 
**June 5, 2020**
 
## Participants
***
 
### Technical Working Group
* Shawn Acuña, Metropolitan Water District (MWD)
* Mike Beakes, United States Bureau of Reclamation (USBR)
* Bill Bennett, UC Davis, John Muir Institute of the Environment and Center for Watershed Sciences 
* Larry Brown, United States Geological Survey (USGS)
* Erin Cole, United States Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS)
* Lauren Damon, Interagency Ecological Program (IEP)
* Scott Hamilton, Coalition for a Sustainable Delta
* Sam Luoma, UC Davis, John Muir Institute of the Environment
* Randall Mager, California Department of Water Resources (DWR)
* Deanna Sereno, Contra Costa Water District (CCWD)
* Will Smith, United States Fish and Wildlife Service (Fish & Wildlife Service)

### Project Team
* Mary Beth Day, Kearns & West
* Alyson Scurlock, Kearns & West 
* Graham Long, Compass Resource Management
* Dan Ohlson, Compass Resource Management
* Mike Urkov, FlowWest

### Guest Presenter
* Lenny Grimaldo, ICF

### Guest Observers 
* Gonzalo Castillo, United States Fish and Wildlife Service (Fish & Wildlife Service)
* Josh Korman, Ecometric Research
* Katherine Sun, United States Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS)
* Brycen Swart, California Department of Fish and Wildlife (CDFW)

## Action Items
***
* Kearns & West to circulate a Doodle Poll for potential meeting dates in July.
* Compass to follow up with Josh Korman re: available models and analytical tools.
* Shawn to follow up with Mark Maunder re: the TWG discussion and the FWS model.

## Key Agreements or Outcomes
***
TWG members highlighted the need for more discussion regarding how best to model any proposed entrainment actions, highlighting that a multiple model approach may be the best way forward.
TWG members highlighted the need for more discussion and careful attention regarding the way density dependence will be implemented into the Maunder and Deriso Model.

## Introductions
***
The project team reviewed the agenda and attendance roster for TWG members.

## Working Group Discussion – Entrainment 
***

*Presentation on Delta Smelt Salvage and Entrainment Study Updates*

Lenny Grimaldo (ICF) presented key conclusions and management relevance from two Delta Smelt salvage and entrainment studies to provide context for what the TWG is aiming to accomplish with the SDM process. 

*Discussion on Entrainment*

The group discussed Lenny’s presentation on Delta Smelt Salvage and Entrainment Study Updates. 

* A TWG member asked what the estimated pre-screen loss is.
  + A guest observer said that the pre-screen loss is estimated to be in the 50 to 100 range. 
  + The TWG member suggested that the pre-screen loss estimates could be the reason for differences between estimates from these studies and the Life Cycle Model. 
* Lenny noted that there are already Old and Middle River (OMR) protections for Delta Smelt and suggested exploring OMR management and its effects on turbidity models in the South Delta. He asked what other model could be used or developed as a forecast tool in addition to other Delta Smelt salvage models to produce better predictions for management if OMR is not affecting turbidity in the South Delta.
  + A TWG member said that there is turbidity in the Delta, and it is determined by complex conditions. If turbidity goes down to the South Delta, Delta Smelt will go there as it is in their interest to go with the best turbidity they can find.  
  + Lenny said it would be a useful exercise if there was a better model or if a turbidity model was used in entrainment forecasting. Beyond that, he is not sure how the salvage and entrainment studies could help the SDM process.  
* A TWG member asked if predictions can be used in modeling if turbidity is the determining factor for the difference between pre-screen losses. The trip for a fish to get to the intake from Clifton Court Forebay (CCF) to the tracing facility with all of the predators is a much different journey than a fish traveling from a general location to the tracing facility. 
  + A guest observer said that pre-screen losses are more sensitive if they are made a function of turbidity and that the shallower part of CCF could be an area where there is a lot of pre-screen loss. If the model was run to have turbidity effects varying by facility, it would take predictions of movement and try to align it with salvage by estimating slightly different turbidity effects. Field data would be useful for looking at differences between the two facilities. 
* A TWG member asked for the group’s opinions on which entrainment model should be used going forward, given the limitations of the Bioenergetics Model. 
  + A TWG member said that the Life Cycle Model and boosted Regression Tree Model have potential and flaws. The Life Cycle Model suffers from scaling mismatch compared to water operations management and is nonspatial, and the Regression Tree Model does not perform well as a forecasting model. 
  + Lenny suggested using all models available and recommended using the McWilliams turbidity model with known effects on salvage and entrainment in addition to the Life Cycle Model and Regression Tree Model. It is ideal to use whatever results can be drawn from these models that can be calibrated.
  + A TWG member noted that the group has identified turbidity actions and actions that affect turbidity during the SDM process.
  + Lenny said that the limitations of turbidity models are the calibrations themselves. If the South Delta continues to get clearer, there might be more flexibility in OMR management. 
  + A guest observer noted that clear models need high pre-screen loss and that the statistical model had higher pre-screen loss. They suggested resolving this with more field data to ensure the prediction in the statistical model is wrong. They asked if re Delta Smelt are being eaten and is that why they are not being caught in clear water or are they avoiding clear water?
  + A TWG member said that Delta Smelt seek turbid waters if they can find it. If they go to CCF, they are done. 
  + A guest observer said that the turbidity-based simulations never fit the data well and questioned if this was due to complex behaviors or if the turbidity data was not right. 
  + Lenny said that the most important point is that tagging technology needs to be applied to wild Delta Smelt.
* A project team member noted that field data could help improve things for the next round of modeling and asked if there were additional things that could be worthwhile for the TWG to examine as part of next year’s process.
  + A guest observer suggested considering indirect entrainment losses, given the population and exports, and potentially including nonparametric modeling approaches in the analysis. There is a lot of work being done using covariates and a lot of literature that could be used to investigate losses by Delta Smelt. 
  + A guest observer clarified if indirect losses meant entraining fish in the South Delta with predation.
  + A guest observer said that they were thinking more about how diversion contributes to population trajectory from year to year in terms of quality and quantity, and the percent of the population at risk. 
* A TWG member said that they think the biggest problem is habitat loss and the focus should be on habitat restoration and making the South Delta look more like an estuary.

## Working Group Discussion – Maunder & Deriso Model
***

*Presentation on Maunder & Deriso Model*

Shawn Acuña (MWD) presented a brief overview of the Maunder and Deriso (2011) Model and noted that he would compile the TWG’s questions and pass them on to the modelers.  

*Discussion on Maunder & Deriso Model*

The group discussed Shawn’s presentation on the Maunder and Deriso Model. 

* The group discussed the model’s density dependence relationship.
  + Shawn noted that the modelers felt the density dependence relationship might be due to numbers they found in 1976 to 1978, but the relationship still held up when they updated their numbers with the pre- and post-2002 period. 
  + A guest observer noted that old data is still being kept when more data is added.
  + Shawn said that they put in a dummy variable for 2002 to break up the data to see where density dependence works on the time frame. The structure of the model and how it can be used is what is key, not the results. 
  + A guest observer said that believing whether density dependence is reliably estimated is important. 
  + A TWG member said that they think when a dependence variable is included in a model, you are not really getting down to what the true mechanisms are. 
  + Shawn said that the model is run to test dependence and it therefore can be removed or added.
  + A TWG member said that the model was developed using a template of a standard stock assessment model. It does not seem to include any statements where density dependence is with Delta Smelt. The TWG member asked where they come up with density dependence and suggested that the biggest problem with this model is overdependence on the model.
  + A TWG member said Shawn mentioned that habitat is limiting in the model and noted that habitat is the indicator for density dependence.
  + A TWG member suggested that there is not a way to identify what aspect of Delta Smelt’s lifestyle is density dependent. 
  + A TWG member agreed with other member’s concerns with the model and added that the model has not captured the limiting resources that need to be captured. The model does not seem to be helpful from a management perspective. 
  + A guest observer questioned whether the model is confusing density dependence with something else.
  + A TWG member agreed with others and said you can have density dependence in a population living in 10,000 square miles or one square mile. The TWG member said that fish no longer have habitat to exploit and whether they are experiencing density dependence or not is irrelevant. Delta Smelt are in the North Delta, which is a much smaller area than when they were in the whole Delta.
  + A TWG member said that they think the density dependence is distracting in the model and is reflecting other things going on that cannot be stated clearly in a model. There is the management issue of other fish exploiting the available resources. The focus should be on how to resolve the issue that is causing the density dependence. 
  + Shawn suggested that the density dependence distraction was the purpose of the model. He thought it was useful that it pointed out covariates. 
  + A TWG member clarified if the question is whether or not adding density dependence to the model is distorting the model results.
  + A guest observer agreed that the way the density dependence is implemented is the key issue and suggested that the model could be worth running without the density dependence, although they would question if the data was good enough. They asked if the model results bias the assessment of flow/policy decisions and does it give us a biased answer in some policy way.
  + Shawn said that the modelers acknowledged there would be some data issues and that they did not test the outflow of the model. They instead did analysis on conceptual discussions with those who helped contribute to the model. 
* The project team asked the TWG if there was interest in carrying forward with this model.
  + A TWG member said that stock assessments for every population are valuable but the way density dependence was added is problematic. They suggested rerunning the model with a different set of covariates. 
  + A guest observer said that the Life Cycle Model was much more carefully reviewed and that the Maunder and Deriso Model was not focused on applying to policy decisions and needs more careful analysis. 
  + A TWG member said that there is danger in picking results from different models that are assumed to be equivalent. Things can get taken out of context and models already have things in them where we worry about their applicability. The TWG member asked if it was possible to establish criteria for which models are acceptable to be used in the SDM process. 
  + A project team member said that there is literature on how different models can be used in an SDM process. It can be powerful if models with different parameters come back with the same results, and differences between models can be used to understand what is going on with the model.
  + A TWG member suggested not putting more resources into the Maunder and Deriso Model when the TWG’s suggestions have already been reflected in the Life Cycle Model.
  + A TWG member agreed that the Life Cycle Model is the next iteration of state-space modeling for Delta Smelt. Density dependence was not attempted in the Life Cycle Model, but it is proposed for the next iteration.
  + A project team member asked what the timeline was for density dependence to be included in the next round of the Life Cycle Model.
  + A TWG member said that it is just being explored right now but it would be three years minimum. 
  + Shawn said he would like to get the Maunder and Deriso’s feedback if the Life Cycle Model is an upgrade to their model. 
  + A guest observer expressed concern that Maunder and Deriso may not be able to devote enough time to update their model and agreed that the Life Cycle Model already addresses a lot of the concerns that were brought up. They asked if there are other tools that are being explored or if it is narrowed down to two models.
  + A project team member said that the Rose Bioenergetics Model was reviewed by the TWG and it will likely be used by the group. The project team will follow up with the guest observer to discuss the tools the TWG is exploring.

## Next Steps and Work Planning
***

*Upcoming Meetings*

The project team reviewed the remaining meetings in June. They will send out a Doodle Poll for meeting placeholders in July. 

* Friday, June 19 from 9:00-11:00 a.m.
  + Actions “binning” and discuss modeling needs
* Monday, June 22 from 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m.
  + Review progress on effects pathways documentation and Phase 2 report
* Friday, June 26 from 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m.
  + Review progress on effects pathways documentation and Phase 2 report