# Technical Working Group Meeting 12
***

**March 27, 2020**

## Participants
***

### Technical Working Group
* Shawn Acuña, Metropolitan Water District (MWD)
* Mike Beakes, United States Bureau of Reclamation (USBR)
* Larry Brown, United States Geological Survey (USGS)
* Erin Cole, United States Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS)
* Lauren Damon, Interagency Ecological Program (IEP)
* Ben Geske, Delta Science Program (DSP)
* Scott Hamilton, Coalition for a Sustainable Delta
* Sam Luoma, UC Davis, John Muir Institute of the Environment
* Randall Mager, California Department of Water Resources (DWR)
* Deanna Sereno, Contra Costa Water District
* Will Smith, United States Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS)
* Kate Spear, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)

### Project Team
* Mary Beth Day, Kearns & West
* Sara Omar, Kearns & West 
* Graham Long, Compass Resource Management
* Dan Ohlson, Compass Resource Management
* Bruce DiGennaro, Essex
* Mike Urkov, FlowWest

### Other Participants 
* Dennis Murphy, University of Nevada, Reno

## Action Items
***
* The Project team to schedule follow-up call with Shawn and Sam regarding contaminant actions; will notify TWG in case others want to join.  
* The Project Team agrees to update the spreadsheet with new information from the TWG.
* The Project Team to set up a call with Larry by April 21 to discuss the process of adding slides to his presentation. 
* Larry agrees to inquire about existing sediment models and issues associated with placing sediments with contaminants. 
* Larry agrees to talk to USGS about known techniques for moving sediments past dams. 
* Lauren agrees to circulate reports or other sources from the Water Board related to research about the nature flow regime. 
* Will agrees to share the Delta Smelt lifecycle model/diagram to assist in brainstorming actions. 

## Key Agreements or Outcomes
***
TWG members agreed to convert the May 22 full day, in-person meeting focused on modelling and analysis into two half-day webinars.

## Introductions
***
The Project Team reviewed the agenda and TWG members introduced themselves.

Before opening the discussion on candidate management actions, the following topics were discussed:

* A TWG member shared an update on why Bill Bennet has not participated in the TWG recently.
  + The Project Team noted that they are looking for resources to get Bill back on the TWG and asked for recommendations. 
* The Project Team is coordinating with Larry about giving the Policy Group the same presentation that he gave the TWG noting that there is a correlation between this SDM process and other scientific efforts. 
  + The Project Team will set up a call with Larry by April 21 to discuss his presentation. 
* It was noted that Richard Cannon’s presentation is a good summary on containments, and he will also be presenting to the Policy Group and CAMT.
* A TWG member requested a presentation on the SDM process for the contaminant work team.
  + The Project Team agreed to coordinate with the TWG member on a presentation to the contaminant work team this summer.  

## Candidate Management Actions and Open Brainstorming Session
***
The objective of the meeting was to brainstorm candidate management actions. The discussion was structured around the following focal areas:

**1. Contaminants**

TWG members provided the following reflections on proposed actions related to contaminants:

* TWG were encouraged to reference existing data and specific sources when identifying candidate actions.
* Cache Slough is critical habitat for Delta Smelt and an area where spawning happens.
* One potential action is to treat, restore or divert Ulatis Creek.
  + This action is based on a specific location with a manageable approach.
  + A TWG member asked if Ulatis Creek is also a source of mercury to Cache Slough.
* Urban run-off from Sacramento, including pyrethroids, could be another source for Cache Slough.
* The Sacramento Publically Owned Treatment Works (POTW) is designed to reduce ammonium as well as pesticides. These contaminants could be included in studies on the influence of improved treatment on nutrients.
* Actions that affect flows and the fate of water from the San Joaquin River must include consideration of changing exposure to selenium, as well as mercury and pyrethroid-like pesticides. 
* TWG members noted the primary ways to manage contaminants are source control or treatment or removal of contaminants. 	
  + It’s important to note that source control is broad and needs to be defined. Some argue that it may not be cost effective. 
  + Finding a solution may involve proposing actions with a high cost, for example engineering actions.
  + There may be resistance from a policy perspective, particularly if the action isn’t source control. 
* Treated wetlands aren’t successful because of their large scale.
  + The TWG agreed that scale matters and therefore it’s important to identify hotspots within localized regions when discussing actions.
* The Project Team and TWG members agreed to coordinate on updating the list of potential contaminants actions. 

**2. Turbidity**

A TWG member provided the following reflections on actions related to turbidity:

* The Bay-Delta system has come to equilibrium at this point. To increase turbidity, a sediment supply of the right size is needed and must be transported to the Delta, which is difficult. 
* Actions that would happen above a dam, within a dam and below a dam are all different. 
* Upper watershed actions for all seasons, include:
  + Removing all dams and re-establishing natural sediment transport processes.
  + Removing dams from selected rivers and partially restoring natural sediment transport processes.
  + Developing infrastructure to transport sediment over or through dams.
  + Encouraging bank erosion and channel migration below dams.
  + Supplementing erodible sediments below dams. 
    - A TWG member noted that the perception that muddy water is bad needs to be addressed from a regulatory and public standpoint.
* Within Delta actions include: 
  + Depositing dredge spoils or other sources of fine sediments in shallow shoal areas where they can be suspended by wind wave action.
  + Depositing dredge spoils or other sources of fine sediments in shallow islands where they can be suspended by wind wave action.
  + Encouraging erosion of selected levees, particularly those associated with already flooded islands.
  + Conducting dredging operations during summer to increase turbidity in desired areas.
  + Physically harvesting submerged aquatic vegetation during the summer to expose fine sediments to current and wave actions. 
    - A TWG member noted that they like the idea of working with nature and augmenting natural processes. 
* A TWG member asked about the effectiveness of treating floating aquatic vegetation. 
* The TWG discussed removing sediments from certain locations (i.e. via exposure to wind, being directed in the right direction, location, timing).
  + A TWG member notes that we have the capability to model these scenarios. 
* A TWG member asks about large-scale restoration of ecological flow regimes and the role it would play in encouraging erosion. 
  + A TWG member notes that Hoover Creek is one location where this was seen to work in the early 2000s.
  + A TWG member agreed that you can reintroduce the natural flow regime but need to keep water storage in mind as well.
* A TWG member asked about the feasibility of pulling sediments of a particular particle size from dams for augmentation. 
  + A TWG member agreed to inquire amongst colleagues if they are aware of techniques for moving sediments through and around dams. 
* The TWG acknowledged mercury is present in many potential sediment sources and needs to be considered when discussing turbidity actions.
* A TWG member agreed to circulate reports on natural flow regimes to the group. 

**3. Water Temperature**

A TWG member acknowledged the need for an integrated model that shows daily variations in water temperature and flow throughout the Delta. 

* Potential actions include:
  + Releasing cold water from upstream reservoirs to cool the Delta. 
  + Operating infrastructure to maximize connectivity amongst different areas, thereby allowing fish to access cooler water.
  + Directing fish away from areas that may experience temperature spikes (i.e. hot spots).
  + Injecting sharp pulses of cool water into at-risk areas at strategic times.

**4. Low Salinity Zone**

A TWG member shared potential actions related to the Low Salinity Zone (LSZ) and noted that they welcome input from the TWG on these proposed actions. 

* Potential actions include:
  + Flow augmentation at various times of year derived from water transfers, reservoir releases, or changes in Central Valley Project or State Water Project operations.
  + Seasonally modifying the operation of Suisun Marsh Salinity Control Gates to improve habitats in the Suisun Marsh for Delta Smelt (with summer reoperation).
  + Constructing temporary and permanent salinity control reservoirs and devices. 
  + Filling in shipping channels. 
    - A TWG member notes that this would be an interesting model to the degree that the creation of the shipping channel led to salinity and inclusion. Also notes that it might cause damage to the fishery and wonders if the shipping industry should provide funding for restoration. 
  + Fallow agricultural lands in dry and critical years to divert water for outflow.

**5. Adult to Larvae Life Stage**

A TWG member emphasized that there are areas within the Delta that are spawning hotspots. 

* Actions include:
  + Making more local habitat available for spawning by improving transient conditions (i.e. temperature, salinity and turbidity) during critical times to disperse spawning adults.
    - For example, cooling habitat with cold-water flows, restoration that provides shade, cooling devices in spawning hot spots, physical salinity barriers, and more controlled environments like hatcheries. 
  + Removing vegetation and restoring or modifying levees.
  + Supplementing habitat for adult Delta Smelt.
  + Improving egg survival. 
    - A TWG member noted that this does not seem to be a limiting factor, but this could be confirmed through additional modeling.	
* The group agrees to collectively continue brainstorming and adding ideas to this topic.

## Next Steps and Work Planning
***
*Upcoming Meetings*

The group discussed upcoming meeting topics and schedule and agreed to the following:

* Larry to present on transient habitat at the next meeting (April 8). 
* Presentation on entrainment will be postponed to a later date.
* The all day, in-person session on modelling and analysis planned for May 22 will be converted into two half-day webinars.
  + The Project Team will coordinate on potential dates. 