# Technical Working Group Meeting 15
***

**May 8, 2020**

## Participants
***

### Technical Working Group
* Shawn Acuña, Metropolitan Water District (MWD)
* Mike Beakes, United States Bureau of Reclamation (USBR)
* William Bennett, UC Davis, John Muir Institute of the Environment and Center for Watershed Sciences 
* Larry Brown, United States Geological Survey (USGS)
* Erin Cole, United States Fish & Wildlife Service (FWS)
* Lauren Damon, Interagency Ecological Program (IEP)
* Scott Hamilton, Coalition for a Sustainable Delta
* Sam Luoma, UC Davis, John Muir Institute of the Environment
* Deanna Sereno, Contra Costa Water District
* Will Smith, United States Fish & Wildlife Service (FWS)
* Ted Sommer, California Department of Water Resources (DWR)

### Project Team
* Mary Beth Day, Kearns & West
* Alyson Scurlock, Kearns & West 
* Graham Long, Compass Resource Management
* Dan Ohlson, Compass Resource Management
* Bruce DiGennaro, The Essex Partnership/CSAMP Program Manager
* Mike Urkov, FlowWest

### Guest Presenter
* Evan Carson, United States Fish & Wildlife Service (FWS)

### Guest Observers 
* Melinda Baerwald, California Department of Water Resources (DWR)
* Rosemary Hartman, California Department of Water Resources (DWR)

## Action Items
***
* Compass to schedule a check-in with Will Smith and Mike Urkov the week of May 18 to coordinate prior to Will’s presentation at the May 22 TWG meeting.
* Compass to coordinate with Larry and Lauren (temperature/turbidity) and Shawn and Sam (contaminants) on actions spreadsheet.
* TWG members to update actions spreadsheet.
  + TWG members should reach out to Compass if they would like support.
* Shawn to coordinate with Compass regarding Maunder and Deriso model.
* Kearns & West to send calendar holds for additional June meetings.

## Key Agreements or Outcomes
***
TWG members agreed that the candidate management action spreadsheet was a good format to move forward with organizing their discussion of potential management actions. TWG members supported casting a wide net for modeling and analysis tools at this stage. 

## Introductions
***
The Project Team reviewed the agenda and noted all future webinars will use a passcode for meeting access. 

## Working Group Discussion – Supplementation
***

*Presentation on Supplementation and Delta Smelt*

Evan Carson (FWS) shared an overview of supplementation and Delta Smelt, with a focus on genetics and population. Evan provided a brief history of contrasting management programs for two fish species, the Razorback sucker and Rio Grande silvery minnow, before focusing on supplementation challenges that exist for the Delta Smelt population in terms of the 2019 Biological Opinion (BiOp) for Delta Smelt.

*Discussion on Supplementation and Delta Smelt*

The group discussed Evan’s presentation on supplementation and Delta Smelt.

*A TWG member noted habitat is a high priority.
  + Evan agreed that supplementation can be an essential tool, but there are a lot of variables involved in sustaining a species.
* TWG members asked questions regarding procedures for maintaining genetic diversity while scaling up hatchery populations, life stages they would be scaled up to, timeline for a conservation hatchery, and who will be evaluating the process for scaling up populations. 
  + Evan said FWS is discussing how to integrate production while maintaining genetic diversity and that other systems have been successful in doing so. Life stages for scaling up have not been determined but modern markers will be essential for supplementation moving forward. The plan for a conservation hatchery is a decade out and there is currently a multi-agency steering committee that is working towards different components of regulatory research and studies for scaling up.
* A TWG member noted that focusing on subpopulations could be very important to expand the whole population and hatchery in the future. Benefits could be provided to subpopulations that could provide advantages to the whole population.
  + Evan said the population should be managed more broadly to protect all types of diversity. It is important to look at the habitats the whole population lives in and how best to manage different areas of the Delta.
  + A TWG member agreed that focusing on subpopulations could be important but only if it provides a benefit to the whole population. Issues needs to be considered in the context of the whole population. 

The project team asked the group if supplementation is fundamentally different the way it has been described under the BiOp and how it should be treated in the different management action scenarios.

* A TWG member noted hatchery supplementation would ideally be integrated into the entire conceptual model. 
* A TWG member said where, when, and how many fish need to be considered in potential supplementation actions due to fish only living a couple of months.
* A TWG member said there might be data from the literature that would help assess hatchery fish survival in the wild. 
* The project team agreed that they will likely reach out to experts to assist with determining the assumptions and ranges for hatchery effectiveness in the fall. 
* An observer stated that the multi-agency group working on supplementation is reviewing the draft hatchery management plan which currently recommends adult and larvae life stages for release. They will share the plan after its release sometime by summer.  

A TWG member asked if there is a way that assumptions can be incorporated into the process and if the group is able to move forward with modeling that is needed.

* The project team responded that there are various management actions to consider and the group is brainstorming which are most promising to explore in the future. The SDM process can explore potential actions while documenting assumptions and uncertainties. 
* A TWG member asked if there has been discussion about which quantitative tools will be used in the future. It would be relatively easy to build a model and update or add assumptions using R script. 
  + The project team agreed the group would likely use this sort of modeling process. The bioenergetics model will be discussed at the next meeting.

## Working Group Discussion – Candidate Management Actions
***
The project team discussed the candidate management actions spreadsheet and asked TWG members for their review of the spreadsheet. The purpose of the spreadsheet is to gather and categorize the full range of actions suggested by TWG members, and to help the TWG decide which actions should be prioritized for further analysis as part of the SDM process. 

* TWG members agreed the spreadsheet is a good format to lay out potential management actions that have been discussed. 
* The project team and TWG members started to review some of the actions in the spreadsheet as an example. Actions will be clarified over the next few weeks and then placed into bins to decide which ones to move forward with. The project team will schedule individual or small group meetings with TWG members to review actions in the spreadsheet.

The project team reviewed bioenergetics modeling and displayed the Rose model structure to give a sense of how actions may be evaluated by modeling in the future. 

* Sensitivity analyses are needed for actions that drive outcomes the most because there are uncertainties in quantitative analyses. 
* TWG members agreed the process seemed straight forward.

## Next Steps and Work Planning
***

*Upcoming Meetings*

The next three meetings will be focused around modeling/analysis and ongoing linkage of modeling and management actions. 

* The next meeting is on Friday, May 22 and will be focused on the bioenergetics model. 
*Two to three additional meetings will be scheduled for June.

The project team asked if there were other models that should be discussed with the group in upcoming meetings.

* TWG members suggested the Maunder and Deriso model and the FWS Life Cycle Model. 
* The project team and TWG members agreed that a wide net should be cast when considering models/analysis tools at this stage. 
* The project team suggested having a meeting focused on strengths and weaknesses of each model after gaining exposure to different models over the next few weeks. 